SOURCE: https://fictionprize.worldhistory.org/posts/14

Historical & Mythological Short Fiction
World History Encyclopedia's international historical and mythological short story contest
th issue of the Ink of Ages Update, a monthly email by me, Joanne Taylor, with a focus on writing, reading, and well ... more writing. Thanks for being here! If this email was forwarded to you, you can
After months of reading, careful consideration, and discussions behind the scenes, we have the youth and adult shortlists ready! We loved so many of the stories on the longlists that this was not easy.
You can read the opening lines from the
adult and youth shortlists
on the new Ink of Ages website!
These are the favourites from our favourites. Several made us laugh, and at least three made me cry (surprise, surprise 😂). Thank you to everyone who took part, writers and our fabulous reading team.
Do you have questions about Ink of Ages, historical/myth-inspired fiction, or writing short stories in particular? Editing fiction is my day job (Ink of Ages being my way to give back and celebrate my favourite genres), and over the last three years, I have read a LOT of the Ink of Ages entries and been on the judging panel, too. So if you could ask me anything, what would you want to know?
If we get enough questions, I'll be interviewed on World History Encyclopedia's "Ask the Experts" feature (eek! but go on, make me do it 😅). This is usually members only, but we'll make sure all Ink of Ages Update subscribers have access to hear the answers to your questions. Just hit reply to let me know your writing, editing, and contest-related questions!
I'll be back to let you know the winners of Ink of Ages 2026 on the 23rd/24th of February!
Happy reading and writing,
FREE FOR THE WORLD, SUPPORTED BY YOU
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is generously sponsored by Oxford University Press.
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.
Ink of Ages: all rights reserved by the authors (2023-2025).
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a
registered trademark.