SOURCE: https://fictionprize.worldhistory.org/judges

Historical & Mythological Short Fiction
World History Encyclopedia's international historical and mythological short story contest
Oxford University Press Editor
Stefan Vranka has been an acquisitions editor in the Academic & Trade division of Oxford University Press, New York, for more than fifteen years. Stefan's list covers Classics, Archaeology, and Ancient History.
J.F. (Jenny) Fox grew up surrounded by the past, minutes from Virginia’s Historic Triangle. After graduating, Jenny moved to New York City to pursue a career in children’s publishing.
Author & Mythology Researcher
Helen Nde is a writer and artist currently based in Atlanta, GA. She curates Mythological Africans, an online space for exploring mythology, folklore, spirituality, and culture from the African continent.
David Tollen is a best-selling and award-winning author, expert witness, attorney, sought-after speaker, and instructor at U.C. Berkeley Law School. He specializes in explaining complex topics in simple, user-friendly language.
Louise M. Pryke is an historian and author who has taught numerous courses in ancient languages, myth, and literature at Macquarie University and the University of Sydney. Louise's research interests include the myths and narrative literature of the ancient Near East, and the interplay between humanity, animality, and divinity in the ancient world.
World History Encyclopedia
Joanne is a writer, independent fiction editor, and proofreader passionate about language and culture, world mythology and folklore, and human-centred marketing. One of her favourite mythological creatures is the makara.
World History Encyclopedia
Taabir is a History and Literature student with a special interest in socio-cultural and gender history. She is currently pursuing her Bachelors from Delhi University. She is also passionate about writing.
Discover the titles our judges have been writing, editing, or enjoying recently on the
The quality of the writing, including language use and overall craftsmanship.
Evaluation of the story's style, prose, and ability to engage and captivate the reader.
The uniqueness and freshness of the ideas and concepts presented in the story.
Creative approaches to storytelling, character development, or narrative techniques.
The portrayal of historical settings, events, or figures with accuracy or plausibility and attention to detail.
The ability to evoke a sense of time and place, creating an immersive experience.
The overall impression and impact the story has on the reader.
The enjoyment and satisfaction derived from reading the story.
All submissions that meet the entry requirements will be read by our panel of trained submission reviewers.
Each qualifying entry will be read by at least two different reviewers in order to select the longlist.
Longlisted stories are read again
by at least two different reviewers in order to select the shortlist.
The judges select the winners from the shortlist via scoring according to the above judging criteria. Bonus points are awarded for being in a "judge's favourite" top 5 list.
Teaches Economics at Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi; ancient history enthusiast.
History is the backbone of every culture and society as we're shaped by our experiences as well as those of our family and nations.
Law student. Writer. History enthusiast. Amateur dinosaur impressionist.
Verbal Folklore Enthusiast. There’s something powerful about seeing the world through a different lens.
Editor in training who loves Mesoamerican and South American history and mythology.
Student and fiction lover. The footprint of epic stories and figures is irreplaceable.
Portuguese and Spanish translator, writing a blog, crazy about Greek myths.
Student and Norse mythology enthusiast. Fiction allows empathy across time, culture, and geography.
Student and lifelong fiction enthusiast. Fiction is an escape from real world.
English teacher with a passion for historical fiction.
Fiction helps us to understand the world, and lets us escape into new ones. Sometimes both!
Researcher, writer and bona fide bookworm.
The greatness and humanity of history lies in the power of storytelling.
Author, folklorist and amateur historian.
Creative Writing student and avid TV show watcher and book reader.
Student and avid historical fiction reader!
Enamoured by architecture and tech, H.H. plans spaces where audiophiles plot.
Someone else read a lot of entries. Thank you!
FREE FOR THE WORLD, SUPPORTED BY YOU
We're  determined not to charge writers entry fees.
Open to entries in English from anywhere in the world.
A dedicated team of WHE staff, submission readers, judges, and translators.
Stay informed about submission deadlines, winners announcements, writing tips, and general feedback from the judges.
My favourite editing tips. Writing and editing advice benefits from two disclaimers, I think: Do whatever you want as long as it works. And choose to ignore advice that doesn't inspire you, Let's go!
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is generously sponsored by Oxford University Press.
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.
Ink of Ages: all rights reserved by the authors (2023-2025).
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a
registered trademark.