SOURCE: https://fictionprize.worldhistory.org/enter-the-contest

Historical & Mythological Short Fiction
World History Encyclopedia's international historical and mythological short story contest
Before you enter, please review our
and the contest's terms & conditions below.
Submissions open from 28 July
Join us on social media @WHEncyclopedia #InkOfAges
@ink_of_ages on X and @whe.fiction on Instagram
We email each entrant about the status of their story, but you can sign up for monthly updates, too! Stay informed about submission deadlines, winners announcements, advice, and general feedback from the judges, without having to rely on social media.
Tell me more about these email updates →
28 July – 29 August 2025:
Dates subject to change, but we try not to!
Please read these Terms & Conditions below carefully before submitting to the contest. By submitting to our contest, you are agreeing with all Ink of Ages Fiction Prize Terms & Conditions.
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is organized by World History Encyclopedia and sponsored by Oxford University Press. Please read these Terms & Conditions carefully before submitting to the contest. By submitting to our contest, you agree to the Ink of Ages Fiction Prize Terms & Conditions.
Entrants must be 18 years old or above to enter the main contest and aged 13–17 for the Youth Prize.
Submissions can be from anywhere in the world.
Submissions must be in English as we don’t currently have the capacity to translate entries submitted in other languages.
3. Submission Guidelines
Entries must be between 1,500 and 2,000 words in length, and between 800 and 1,000 words for the Youth Prize.
Entries must be historical or mythological fiction inspired by the past and set before 1975, in a time that is clearly different from the present.
The short story should be a stand-alone piece, not an extract from a longer work.
Each submission must be accompanied by a completed entry form and Youth Prize submissions must also be accompanied by parental/guardian consent.
Only one entry per author is allowed.
The story must be previously unpublished (your own blog or social media page is okay).
Simultaneous submissions are allowed as long as the author informs us when the story is published elsewhere and whether the entry needs to be withdrawn from the contest. You can request your submission to be withdrawn by email..
4. Formatting Requirements
Entries must be typed in Times New Roman or Calibri 12pt with double or 1.5 line spacing.
Filenames must include the title followed by word count, with no hyphens e.g., The Last Days of Atlantis 1938, or Surpanakha's Lament 1843. (Google forms automatically adds a hyphen and author name, then we run some code that removes the hyphen and everything after it so submissions are anonymous when we read them).
Do put the story title at the top of the submission document (without the word count number) and do add page numbers.
Do not include your name in the submission document or filename. This enables us to judge entries anonymously.
Entries will be judged on literary merit, historical interest, originality and creativity, and overall impact and enjoyment.
The decision of the judging panel is final and cannot be disputed.
All entries must be the original work of the entrants and must not infringe the rights of any other party. AI-generated text is not accepted and decided at the discretion of the reading panel.
Entries must not contain defamatory, obscene, or offensive content.
The personal data provided will be used solely for the purpose of administering the contest.
Your submission and associated information will be deleted from our systems within 18 months, except that which is published. To request changes or removal of information, please let us know via email.
Please review the WHE privacy policy for more information: worldhistory.org/privacy.
8. Intellectual Property
Entrants retain the copyright of their entries and grant World History Encyclopedia (“WHE”) a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, royalty-free, nonexclusive license to publish the contest submission (the short story) in one or more venues online and in print and ebook form, including without limitation on WHE’s websites and on social media, listing the entrant as the author and copyright holder. This license includes all necessary rights and permissions to enable such use by the Ink of Ages Fiction Prize to fulfil the prizes and complete the administration of this competition.
9. General Conditions
Entrants may choose a pseudonym to be published alongside their story instead of their name.
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize reserves the right to disqualify any entry suspected of breaching these terms and conditions.
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize reserves the right to amend these Terms and Conditions or cancel the competition if necessary.
Prizes and judges are subject to change depending on the availability of staff, volunteers, and physical goods.
The winner is responsible for providing their correct bank / payment details within 60 days of being notified in order to receive the cash prize.
10. Notification of Winners
We email every submitting author after the longlist has been selected, so check your junk mail if you don't hear from us. Winners and shortlisted entrants will be notified via the email address provided during submission before public announcements are made. Please ensure the provided email address is accurate and active.
By submitting your entry, you agree to these Terms and Conditions.
For any questions, please contact fiction@worldhistory.org.
FREE FOR THE WORLD, SUPPORTED BY YOU
We're  determined not to charge writers entry fees.
Open to entries in English from anywhere in the world.
A dedicated team of WHE staff, submission readers, judges, and translators.
Stay informed about submission deadlines, winners announcements, writing tips, and general feedback from the judges.
My favourite editing tips. Writing and editing advice benefits from two disclaimers, I think: Do whatever you want as long as it works. And choose to ignore advice that doesn't inspire you, Let's go!
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is generously sponsored by Oxford University Press.
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.
Ink of Ages: all rights reserved by the authors (2023-2025).
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a
registered trademark.