SOURCE: https://fictionprize.worldhistory.org/judges/judges-books

Historical & Mythological Short Fiction
World History Encyclopedia's international historical and mythological short story contest
From the judges who avidly read your stories, here's what they've been working on. Maybe you'll enjoy their work as much as they enjoy yours! (None of these are affiliate links at the moment, but I'll let you know if that changes.)
Oxford University Press Editor
Stefan recommends the following recent titles from OUP:
A fresh narrative history of the rise of Rome's empire in Italy.
A stunning and original portrait of this great general and statesman.
Jenny has written several books for children, including the Head-to-Head History series, and she is a passionate advocate for libraries and literacy for young people.
Two ancient empires battle for the upper paw in this fascinating true tale for ages 5–8.
A true story about two sisters who skirted the rules – and made during WWI.
Fun fact: Louise is one of the very few people who can read the cuneiform script the Epic of Gilgamesh is written in!
Part of Gods and Heroes of the Ancient World,
looks at his adventures and well as the significance of the story’s Ancient Near Eastern context.
Also in Gods and Heroes of the Ancient World,
is the first book dedicated to providing an accessible analysis of this complex goddess.
Author & Mythology Researcher
Expert on all things African mythology, Helen has written books that combine her flair for fictional retellings with her meticulous research and analysis.
Well-researched retellings with insightful contextual notes.
There are some truly georgeous retellings in here. A must-read for folklore fans.
David, attorney by day, has also written historical fantasy quests for middle-grade and teen readers to enjoy.
For ages 9+, a magical, educational novel that teaches science and history! WINNER - Independent Press Award, Distinguished Favorite.
For ages 12+, a spellbinding young adult fantasy. History isn't names and dates – it's an adventure! WINNER of the Next Generation Indie Book Awards.
Fiction Editor & World History Encyclopedia Editor
Two fiction titles Joanne particularly enjoyed editing:
A beginner’s guide to the goddesses, heroines and demonesses in Hinduism’s myths and folktales.
Comitissa of Tuscany Book 2. Love and politics, betrayal and survival, power, relics and prophecies, against the backdrop of the Investiture Controversy.
Student & Ink of Ages Fiction Prize
Taabir, whose excellent judgement is instrumental in the smooth running of Ink of Ages, recommends the following titles:
Edited by Ibolya Horváth
Our first World History Encyclopedia non-fiction title! A truly global overview, bringing diverse cultures and cataclysmic events to life.
A genre-defining mythic fantasy reimagining the life of Circe, the sorceress in The Odyssey.
FREE FOR THE WORLD, SUPPORTED BY YOU
We're  determined not to charge writers entry fees.
Open to entries in English from anywhere in the world.
A dedicated team of WHE staff, submission readers, judges, and translators.
Stay informed about submission deadlines, winners announcements, writing tips, and general feedback from the judges.
My favourite editing tips. Writing and editing advice benefits from two disclaimers, I think: Do whatever you want as long as it works. And choose to ignore advice that doesn't inspire you, Let's go!
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is generously sponsored by Oxford University Press.
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.
Ink of Ages: all rights reserved by the authors (2023-2025).
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a
registered trademark.