SOURCE: https://fictionprize.worldhistory.org/opportunities

Historical & Mythological Short Fiction
World History Encyclopedia's international historical and mythological short story contest
Support global literature
Help us discover the next winning stories
Experience global publishing
Share your language skils
Our positions are unpaid, but fully remote and asynchronous. So you can
gain experience in global publishing
, whatever your time zone.
Winning stories are translated by the World History Encyclopedia (WHE) translation team.
Find out more about translating with WHE →
Ink of Ages is hosted by World History Encyclopedia, a
organization publishing the world's most-read history encyclopedia. Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
Multiple positions available
1-2 hours per week September and October
Enjoy reading fiction in English
Open to reading across diverse historical settings, mythologies, and genres.
You must not be entering Ink of Ages as a writer.
1 mentored position available
10-15 hours per week for 3 months
☑︎ Fluency in English required
☑︎ Open to reading across diverse historical settings, mythologies, and genres.
☒ You must not be entering Ink of Ages as a writer.
You'll help us choose the longlist and shortlist, working directly with the fiction prize team & WHE staff and volunteers:
Read short story submissions
(between 800–2,500 words) and rate them using our simple guidelines.
Provide brief comments
on what stood out or could be improved, to help with selecting the longlist and shortlist.
Join optional team discussions
on stories that fall near the shortlist cut-off or spark debate.
No editing or formal judging experience is required. We’ll give you the guidance you need to take part. But you must already enjoy reading fiction!
[check back in June 2026]
You'll help us run Ink of Ages, working directly with the fiction prize team:
: Help review and score story submissions, using clear guidelines.
: Draft social media content.
: Help upload content to our prize website.
Communications & logistics
: Assist with drafting newsletters, emails, and permission tracking.
: Design simple visuals using Canva or similar tools.
[check back in June 2026]
Stay informed about submission deadlines, winners announcements, writing tips, and general feedback from the judges.
My favourite editing tips. Writing and editing advice benefits from two disclaimers, I think: Do whatever you want as long as it works. And choose to ignore advice that doesn't inspire you, Let's go!
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is generously sponsored by Oxford University Press.
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.
Ink of Ages: all rights reserved by the authors (2023-2025).
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a
registered trademark.