SOURCE: https://fictionprize.worldhistory.org/posts/12

Historical & Mythological Short Fiction
World History Encyclopedia's international historical and mythological short story contest
th issue of the Ink of Ages Update, a monthly email by me, Joanne Taylor, with a focus on writing, reading, and well ... more writing. Thanks for being here! If this email was forwarded to you, you can
We're 95.67% of the way through reading submissions in order to select the longlist! If you entered a short story this year, I'll email you a day or two before the social media announcements go out on 17 November to let you know whether your story was chosen. Phew, it's competitive this year with so many great entries 😅
Our reading team is made of WHE staff and eager wordsmiths from all over the world. Every entry in the youth and adult categories has something to recommend it, and there are so many creative ideas! We're really enjoying reading your work.
Joshua J. Mark, co-founder and content director of WHE, has once again read a great majority of the stories and has some writing advice to share:
Sometimes I can see there's a really good story there but the author hasn't taken the time to craft it into a finished piece. I read one last night where the characters didn't seem like real people. But it felt like they were on their way to becoming "real people" if the author had given the piece more time and attention. Part of great writing is great rewriting.
You need to set the piece aside for long enough so you can return to it as an editor, not a writer. As the creator of the piece, you're going to gloss over mistakes and forgive yourself a hundred times over for lack of development or stilted dialogue – because it's YOUR piece.
FREE FOR THE WORLD, SUPPORTED BY YOU
The Ink of Ages Fiction Prize is generously sponsored by Oxford University Press.
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.
Ink of Ages: all rights reserved by the authors (2023-2025).
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a
registered trademark.