SOURCE: https://nonprofit.worldhistory.org/volunteer/education-editor

write our monthly teachers newsletter, review teaching material submissions, and create educational materials of their own.
World History Encyclopedia is a
publishing the world's most-read history encyclopedia. Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
This position is a volunteer role; you will not get paid for your work.
If you can communicate well and you are able to devote at least five hours per week to this position, we’d like to hear from you.
Apply at the bottom of this page.
Write a monthly newsletter for history teachers that provides inspiration for teaching history. This could be teaching tips, highlighting resources (on WHE and elsewhere), and engaging with current affairs and events (such as Women's History Month, for example). You can find an example of a past newsletter of ours
but you will be free to make it your own.
Review incoming submissions of teaching materials and lesson plans for suitability and give feedback to the creators before publication.
Create teaching materials, collections, and lesson plans on your own. We would expect you to create one teaching material per month.
You are able to commit at least
You have taught history at the high school (or equivalent) level. Past experience is acceptable; we welcome retirees or teachers on parental leave.
You have a track record of creating lesson plans that work for you and other teachers.
You know how to scaffold lesson plans so that they can be easily adapted to students with different levels of knowledge and ability.
You are knowledgeable about and happy to use inquiry-based learning techniques.
5 hours per week (minimum)
Bachelor's degree or higher required
None; virtual, home-based position
Volunteer position (none)
To apply, please complete our application form below in which you can upload your CV, answer a few questions, and record a motivation letter in video form.
APPLICATIONS ARE CURRENTLY CLOSED
World History Encyclopedia is an equal opportunity organization and welcomes applicants from all backgrounds.