SOURCE: https://nonprofit.worldhistory.org/volunteer/youtube-creator

Are you a history enthusiast or student of history with video production skills? World History Encyclopedia is seeking a talented volunteer
to help bring history to life for our audience of over 100,000 subscribers!
World History Encyclopedia is a
publishing the world's most-read history encyclopedia. Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
As our YouTube Creator, you'll be responsible for producing engaging historical content videos
from concept to completion
. This role offers a unique opportunity to share your passion for history with a global audience while honing your video production skills. It is particularly suited for university students of history with a knack for video creation who are looking for work experience.
This is an unpaid volunteer position that offers the opportunity to make a significant impact in global history education.
If are able to devote at least 10 hours per week to this position, we’d like to hear from you.
Apply at the bottom of this page.
Write engaging scripts based on World History Encyclopedia content
Record high-quality video footage
Edit videos to create polished, informative, and entertaining final products
Publish videos on our YouTube channel and engage with our community
Collaborate with our editorial team to align video content with organizational goals
You are able to commit at least
Strong knowledge of and passion for world history
Excellent scriptwriting
and the ability to condense information
Talent for storytelling to make history engaging
Proficiency in video recording and editing software
Clear and engaging on-camera presence
Familiarity with YouTube best practices and trends
Self-motivated with the ability to meet deadlines
Access to video recording equipment (camera, microphone)
Video editing software and skills
10 hours per week (minimum)
Education / Experience
Completed or ongoing BA in History, Film Studies or related subject
None; virtual, home-based position
Volunteer position (none)
To apply, please complete our application form below in which you can upload your CV, answer a few questions, and record a motivation letter in video form.
Application deadline:
World History Encyclopedia is an equal opportunity organization and welcomes applicants from all backgrounds.