SOURCE: https://nonprofit.worldhistory.org/volunteer

Join us in our mission to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization publishing the world's most-read history encyclopedia. The work of our international team helps millions of people around the globe learn about history every single month, entirely free of charge.
Your work will help students, teachers, and the general public appreciate cultural heritage, widen their horizons, and enable them to better understand the globalized world we live in today.
World History Encyclopedia is frequently looking to expand its staff. If you are interested in joining our team, and you wish to contribute a minimum of
of your time to this project, please review the current openings below:
YouTube Channel Manager
We're always looking for volunteers to help us. Whether you're an academic, a retiree, a student, or a professional; whether you work in a library, a marketing agency, or a university ... everyone has skills that can help us!
The encyclopedia is continuously in need of contributions from the following types of volunteers:
listed here that fits you, but you'd still like to volunteer, please feel free to
internship opportunities
Join us! You don't even have to leave your home to do it
ur team collaborates entirely online, without any office. We
our work and there's a spirit of camaraderie in the WHE team.
Join us at the cutting edge of online publishing, with an experienced team of editors, writers, graphic designers, and technologists!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization publishing the world's most-read history encyclopedia. Your work will reach millions of people every month. It will have a real impact on the world's learning and understanding of history. Become a part of our highly international team, with people from all over the world. We're a friendly group of people with a passion for history.
We do not offer any paid positions; our employed core staff is recruited from our pool of volunteers. We prefer to hire people who have shown us that they are already passionate about what we do.