SOURCE: https://nonprofit.worldhistory.org/volunteer/internships

An internship at World History Encyclopedia is an experience at the cutting edge of online publishing. Be part of a truly global and cross-cultural team working entirely remotely, gain valuable experience in historical publishing, and develop highly transferrable skills in the fields of research, writing, editing, online publishing, content management, graphic design, and much more.
You will contribute directly to improving historical literacy on a global scale, while working with a team of like-minded individuals who share a passion for history. Your contributions may be published, allowing you to build a portfolio of work that showcases your expertise and dedication.
World History Encyclopedia only accepts a handful of interns every year. If you wish to apply, please read the following
carefully and make sure that you can meet all of them:
Internships have a duration of
at least three months
, with a minimum time commitment of
must be either currently enrolled in or have completed a university degree program in a field relevant to the internship, id
eally in a subject related to social studies
You are expected to work remotely, using your own computer equipment. Software may be provided if required.
You must be fluent in the English language.
You must be at least 18 years old.
We are unable to make any exceptions, and you must meet all of these requirements.
We accept interns from a wide range of subject areas and will tailor the internship program to the student and their needs. You may be given tasks from the following tracks, depending on your skills and interests:
Review, categorize, and edit encyclopedia content. This can include various tasks such as reviewing submissions to the encyclopedia, sourcing content such as images from third parties, linking to high-quality content on the internet, or creating collections and image galleries. You will work directly with the editorial team. This track is typically suited to degree programs such as History, Literature, Publishing, or Library Sciences.
Directly contribute to the encyclopedia by researching and writing encyclopedic articles, with the guidance and review of the editorial team. You will learn about historical research, writing for the general public, search engine optimisation and editorial processes. To qualify for this track, the intern must have
completed a Bachelor's Degree in a relevant Social Studies subject
such as History, Archaeology, Art History, Politics, or Economics.
Create infographics, maps, and other visual media to help illustrate the encyclopedia and explain historical concepts. You will work closely with the editorial team in order to produce high-quality material suitable for the encyclopedia. You must have experience with Adobe Photoshop or a similar software.
Translate history articles into another language, working with the translation team to ensure that articles are translated to our standards and meet the needs of our readers. You will learn about translation processes in the age of artificial intelligence, editing other people's translations, and providing feedback. This track is typically suited to degree programs such as Translation, Languages, or History.
Engage donors and write grant funding applications. You will distill our organization's mission and values into convincing grant applications. You will work closely with our management team to come up with projects suitable for funding, finding funding opportunities and explore partnerships with like-minded organizations.
We aim to give you a broad learning opportunity and aim to have you complete tasks in multiple tracks if suitable. You will receive training when required.
You will have a dedicated mentor who will be your primary person of contact and with whom you will have regular video calls. You will however work with various members of the team depending on your track.
15 hours per week (minimum)
University degree either in progress or completed
None; virtual, home-based position
Volunteer position (none)
We welcome interns as part of their degree program and will support them to get credit at their university. If your university requires specific paperwork or reports, please let us know in your application.
World History Encyclopedia is part of the
London Arts & Humanities Partnership
and accepts paid placements for
University of London through the LAHP placement scheme with a minimum duration of six months.
Internships at World History Encyclopedia are unpaid.
To apply, please complete our application form below in which you can upload your CV, answer a few questions, and record a motivation letter in video form.
APPLICATIONS ARE CURRENTLY CLOSED
World History Encyclopedia is an equal opportunity organization and welcomes applicants from all backgrounds.