SOURCE: https://www.worldhistory.org/Quaestor/

This text is available in other languages:
"the one who asks questions") was the oldest and lowest office on the
or "path of honor" in ancient
. Considered a stepping stone to higher office in the
ranged from administrating public properties and overseeing treasuries to collecting taxes and recruiting in the provinces, among other tasks.
Like all of the other magistrates, the
was unpaid, leaving entry to the position to only those few with an alternate source of income. However, it still served as a gateway for many young Romans who wished for a life in politics. Although originally flexible, the ladder was codified by the
of 180 BCE, which established the minimum age for entry into each office. The code would be later confirmed by the
commander and dictator
quaestores parricidii
first existed under the rule of kings and was granted judicial powers: prosecuting murder cases and serving as a police inspector. The position continued to exist to some extent in the
but gradually faded out by the 2nd century BCE. During the time of the Roman Republic, new offices were introduced: the
supervised the markets, the
registered citizens and soldiers, the
served as a judicial official and secondary military commander, and lastly, the
administered public properties and treasuries.
At the founding of the Republic, there existed only two
– one was assigned to each of the two consuls. With a staff of scribes, they were put in control of the treasury or
under the supervision of the
. The treasury controlled all state documents both financial and non-financial. The main treasury, the
was located at the foot of Capitoline Hill in Rome.
Although exceptions existed, most individuals entered the Roman Senate through the office of the
automatically receiving a seat in the Senate upon appointment. This first step on the path was usually achieved around the age of 30 – as established by the
– after having served in the
for at least ten years. The next step was the
at the age of 38, who supervised public maintenance:
, food and water supply and the games. The
power and, at the age of 43, held judicial duties, holding both civic and provincial jurisdiction. After the long climb, an individual was prepared to stand for a consul.
was elected by the tribal assembly, the
coming into power under the authority of the Law of the
were added bringing the total to four: two of the
served as quartermasters to the two consuls when in the field, while the other two remained in Rome to supervise the financial affairs of the treasury. Under Sulla (138-78 BCE), the number of
was increased to 20, and to accommodate this increase, he also increased the size of the Senate.
(100-44 BCE) raised the number of quaestors to 40; however, his adopted son and successor, the
(r. 27 BCE to 14 CE) returned it to 20. Sulla had reaffirmed the minimum age for a
to be 30 as in the law, but Augustus reduced it to 25 and transferred the election of the
to the Senate. Another major change during the early days of the
was the appointment of two
to serve as messengers for the emperor while still retaining their financial responsibilities.
As new territories were added to the Republic, major changes in the provincial governments became necessary. When
, Corsica, and Sardinia were acquired from
was assigned to serve as governor while a
accompanied him and oversaw tax collection and recruited soldiers to serve in the
. No additional provincial bureaucracy was provided. This concept would serve as a model for all provincial governments in the Republic. Although most
only served one year, a
assigned to a provincial magistrate often served for a minimum of two years, occasionally three. If the magistrate was absent for any reason, the
was expected to assume command as
or envoy of the emperor.
Even after his time as a
ended, he remained bound for life in faith (
) to his former commander. His financial accounts could be used as evidence in a trial to recover or secure compensation for the illegal acquisition of money or property by a Roman. With a
presiding, by 70 BCE, the jury consisted of one-third senators, one-third equestrians, and one-third
might be tempted to prosecute his own commander to advance his career.
Two of the Republic's most prominent statesmen had distinguished quaestorships: Porcius Cato (
Caesar. Cato was assigned to supervise the treasury. Prior to Cato's time as
neglected their responsibilities and allowed their clerks/scribes to manage the paperwork and daily activities of the treasury. Cato, however, saw it differently; his time in office was referred to as a nightmare. Having studied the obligations of the
and the treasury's purpose beforehand, he demanded the scribes show him their accounts, which he tenaciously reviewed, finding errors – some were made through a scribe's ignorance while others were deliberate. He found uncollected debts and forged documents (even senatorial decrees).
Although considering himself a friend, Cicero wrote that Cato's vigilance over the treasury was carried to the point of obstinacy. He mercilessly lectured the clerks on improper and sloppy bookkeeping and inadequate procedures and brought charges against many of the Roman nobility who owed money to the state. Scribes found guilty of misconduct were dismissed or prosecuted. The courts overflowed with new cases and special judges had to be appointed. Under his control, the treasury's reputation for efficiency and fairness increased.
Unlike Cato, Caesar, who happened to be one of the judges to hear Cato's cases, acquired a foreign assignment in Further Spain. Caesar took advantage of his time in Spain, preparing himself for his political future. During his time as a
, he served under the governor Antistius Vetus. His position was tedious; he travelled from town to town dealing with tax payments, ruling on cases and settling disputes, but it gave him the opportunity to make himself known among the provincials. With his assignment as a
in 67 BCE, Caesar had achieved his first significant goal: a seat in the Senate.
of note was the Roman statesman, orator, and Stoic philosopher
Marcus Tullius Cicero
(106-43 BCE). Early in his career, he incurred the wrath of the Roman dictator Sulla and chose to leave Rome to study
. In 78 BCE, Sulla died, and by 77 BCE, Cicero had returned to Rome with the good intentions of rebuilding his legal career and initiating a campaign to stand for election for a quaestorship. In 75 BCE, he won the election and was one of two
stationed in Sicily. Acquired after the First
, Sicily was an important supplier of grain for Rome. Cicero's duties included calculating the price of the grain and the amount and price of the surplus. In 74 BCE, Cicero returned to Rome, having earned the respect of those in both Sicily and Rome. And, like with Caesar, the real point of being a
was entry into the Senate. Cicero believed in honesty, and according to Anthony Everitt in his
, "He had proved his worth as a public official. He had been able to practice and perfect his advocacy techniques in a more relaxed setting than the Forum" (70).
The emperors Augustus and
(r. 54-68 CE) removed the
from their duties at the treasury, although Emperor
(r. 41-54 CE) temporarily returned their number to 20. Nero reassigned them to supervise the games and had their responsibilities in Rome assigned to other imperial officers. In the provinces, however, they retained most of their financial responsibilities. Although
acquired new duties elsewhere, the emperor, as well as both of the consuls, each had two
, chosen by the emperor, often from the
In the late empire, the emperor's
duties grew in importance with his becoming the emperor's spokesman – the
quaestor sacri palatii
("quaestor of the sacred
") – and aiding in the drafting of laws. His function also increased under the emperors
Constantine the Great
(r. 527-565), where he became a legal counsel, drafting laws and answering petitions.
We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and
translate this definition
into another language!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. Please support free history education for millions of learners worldwide for only
per month by becoming a member. Thank you!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. Please support free history education for millions of learners worldwide for only
per month by becoming a member. Thank you!
Wasson, D. L. (2023, August 23). Quaestor.
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Quaestor/
Wasson, Donald L.. "Quaestor."
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Quaestor/
Wasson, Donald L.. "Quaestor."
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Quaestor/
, published on 23 August 2023. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license:
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
. This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included.
Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.
History delivered to you once a week:
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization publishing free history content that has been carefully researched and reviewed.
            If you liked this content, please consider donating at
www.worldhistory.org/donate/
.
            To remove this message from printouts, you can become a supporting member at
www.worldhistory.org/membership/
.
            Thank you for supporting our work!
Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including
.
                We have been reviewed for educational use by
Common Sense Education
Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin)
Merlot (California State University)
School Library Journal
.
                Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our former name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.
World History Foundation
is a 501(c)3 charity registered in the United States.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit organization registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Québec, Canada.
Some Rights Reserved (2009-2026) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a