SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/research/court-records/archives

This information will help you identify and locate Federal court documents within our holdings. These documents are records of hearings and trials, often including exhibits offered as evidence, of Federal jurisdiction.
You can see a limited number of court case files in the National Archives Catalog. However, at this time most of the information available on this website describes the records, rather than shows them to you. Start with
search tips for the National Archives Catalog
If the records you want to see are not available for viewing online, your options are:
To view or order a copy, you should find where, among our facilities nationwide, the records are physically located and how they are organized (arranged) in the archives. The approximate date of the case also will help to determine if the records are in our holdings.
General descriptions of the broad scope of our Federal court records are available in:
state or territory where a case was filed
, you may locate the National Archives facility that may contain the records you seek.
Also, you can view a list of
National Archives facilities
that hold court records, and links to general descriptions of those records.
Bankruptcy Case Files
Judicial Records relating to American Slavery
Records of The Supreme Court of the United States
District Courts of the United States
Watergate-Related Case Files
Research Guide to the Criminal Case Files of Fort Smith, Arkansas, 1866-1900
United States Federal Judiciary, U.S. Courts
to learn more about the Federal system of courts in the United States.
for information about current activities of the United States Supreme Court.
Federal Judicial Center
for information about this official education and research agency for the Federal courts.
United States Department of Justice
for information about how the Department of Justice (part of the Executive branch of the United States Federal Government) represents the United States Government in courts.
National Center for State Courts
for links to information about state courts and to
web sites of state courts
• More web resources relating to
Federal Courts and Court Opinions
from the Archives Library Information Center (ALIC).
Records of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, RG 116
Effective October 1, 2012, fees have increased for reproductions at all National Archives facilities, including for all commonly-requested genealogical records.
Washington National Records Center
You can also find the location of bankruptcy records based on the
state or territory where the case was filed
U.S. Government Manual
Comprehensive information on the agencies of the Legislative, Judicial, and Executive branches.
This page was last reviewed on September 22, 2021.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272