SOURCE: https://www.worldhistory.org/Tribune/

This text is available in other languages:
Tribune was a title of various offices in ancient
, the two most important of which were the
. The military tribunes were responsible for many administrative and logistics duties, and could lead a section of a legion under a
, or even command one alone on the battlefield. The
wielded great political power as they effectively ran the popular assembly of Rome, proposing bills to vote on and able to personally veto senatorial legislation.
were treasury officials responsible for collecting the tax paid to the
. They then redistributed the funds to pay the legions (
). This treasury function was subsequently abolished, as was the
in the Imperial period. The title
was resurrected, albeit briefly, when it was used for the third class of jurors from 70 BCE, but
then abolished that use too.
title goes right back to early Rome when it was used by tribal commanders, the Latin for tribe being
. The military rank was created in the 5th century BCE when Rome was at
, probably as the two consuls were not sufficient to command a larger army. Thus, the rank of
was formed with consular powers. Initially, there were three such tribunes and then six.
In the Republican period, tribune denoted a senior army rank for which a minimum of five years service was required and members were usually equestrians (
), and more rarely senators. Each legion had six tribunes, and in the Republic, those tribunes assigned to the first four legions formed each year were voted into office by the popular assembly. The tribunes of the other legions were selected by the commander. In the Imperial period, a single legion still had six tribunes, but one was always of senatorial rank (
) while the others were equestrians (
In the field, two of the tribunes were selected by daily rotation to command under the consuls. A tribune in the Republic might command alone a part of or an entire legion for one or two months, but their leadership role was diminished by the introduction of senatorial legates from the 2nd century BCE. Tribunes often commanded a cohort of the urban troops, and in the late
period, the title was more widely assigned to include officers of the legions, Praetorian Guards, auxiliary troops, vexillations (specialised and temporary task forces) and the
- Rome's permanent firefighting force.
An additional type of military tribune was the
. In the early years of Rome, they were cavalry commanders. They also participated in the rituals which accompanied the beginning and end of the campaign season.
As officers, tribunes wore finer armour and a cloak (
) which distinguished them from ordinary legionaries. Tribunes had many administrative and logistics responsibilities, which included management of the legionaries' food supply, their general health, and the overall security of the legion's camp – choosing each night, for example, the night watch and the camp password. Tribunes also raised new recruits and administered justice, including court-martials, where the tribune could impose fines, reduce pay, order corporal punishment, and declare the
penalty for soldiers guilty of offences against army regulations. To assist him in his tasks a tribune had a number of clerical assistants (
) to prepare reports, records, and rosters.
According to tradition the first tribunes of the plebs were created in 494 BCE in order to serve the
, Rome's assembly of the plebs (the ordinary citizens who were not members of the aristocratic
class). The title may derive from, and so the role was assigned to, the
's first tribal leaders although the office of
was already in existence. The initial number is also unclear and was between two and five. More certain is that there were ten tribunes by 449 BCE.
The tribunes, who had to be plebs themselves, were the officers of the popular assembly. In this capacity, they assembled the plebs (
), proposed bills to be voted upon, and passed binding resolutions (
), at first on the plebs only and then, from 287 BCE with the
, on all Roman citizens. Besides passing legislation necessary for the state to function and reflecting the will of the Senate, tribunes could also propose their own bills. Another function was to conduct public prosecutions before the assembly (
). These could be against individuals accused of such crimes as bribery (
). Penalties decided by the tribunes ranged from fines to execution.
Tribunes protected the plebs from any abuses by magistrates. In return, the plebs swore an oath (
) which gave the tribunes a sacred inviolability (
) and a guarantee that the plebs would protect them with their own lives. Further powers were awarded to the tribunes and these included:
From the mid-2nd century BCE, a tribune, after holding office, was entitled to join the Senate. The powers of the tribunes to sway legislation became so great, especially following their practice of forming a partnership with generals in the
reduced their ability to propose new bills, block the Senate's proposals, and qualify themselves for the Senate in 81 BCE. However, popular and sustained unrest in protest at these measures led to the tribune's full powers being reinstated in 70 BCE. The tribunes had consistently fought against the upper classes in the 2nd and 1st century BCE and gained a reputation for being revolutionaries inside the state apparatus. As the contemporary historian,
stated, "they are bound to do what the people resolve and chiefly to focus upon their wishes" (Hornblower, 1505). Defending public accountability and the interests of the ordinary people, it is no surprise then that, in the Imperial period, the tribunes were finally reduced to a negligible political role by
, who took on most of their powers himself, the
We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and
translate this definition
into another language!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. Please support free history education for millions of learners worldwide for only
per month by becoming a member. Thank you!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. Please support free history education for millions of learners worldwide for only
per month by becoming a member. Thank you!
Cartwright, M. (2016, December 07). Tribune.
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Tribune/
Cartwright, Mark. "Tribune."
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Tribune/
Cartwright, Mark. "Tribune."
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Tribune/
, published on 07 December 2016. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license:
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
. This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included.
Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.
History delivered to you once a week:
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization publishing free history content that has been carefully researched and reviewed.
            If you liked this content, please consider donating at
www.worldhistory.org/donate/
.
            To remove this message from printouts, you can become a supporting member at
www.worldhistory.org/membership/
.
            Thank you for supporting our work!
Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including
.
                We have been reviewed for educational use by
Common Sense Education
Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin)
Merlot (California State University)
School Library Journal
.
                Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our former name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.
World History Foundation
is a 501(c)3 charity registered in the United States.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit organization registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Québec, Canada.
Some Rights Reserved (2009-2026) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a