SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/research/accessions

What are New Accessions?
New accessions are federal records recently added to the National Archives holdings. These materials may not be available for research until they have been processed. Processing includes arranging and placing the materials in proper containers and describing the content of the materials. Once records are described they will appear in the
National Archives Catalog
. Some newly accessioned records must be reviewed under the
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
prior to public release.
Data provided in the table and the downloadable spreadsheets is raw data provided to the National Archives by federal agencies when records are proposed for accessioning into NARA's archival holdings. Information such as titles may be abbreviated, or contain letters, numbers, or other data only meaningful to the transferring agency. Such information may be significantly revised during processing by archival staff.
When submitting a reference request for any of these records please include the Accession ID and the FRC Transfer Number (if available). The Accession ID is the unique identifier assigned to records accepted into the archival holdings of the National Archives. The FRC Transfer Number is the unique identifier for records that were stored in a Federal Records Center prior to accessioning. Note that some records will not have an FRC Transfer Number because they were stored at an agency prior to accessioning. If you would like more information about accessing any of these records please contact the
identified in the location column of the table.
The table below displays new accessions for the current fiscal year. Updates are made on a quarterly basis. You can also download individual spreadsheets that include accessions for the past 3 fiscal years.
Download the spreadsheet of accessions for FY 2023.
Download the spreadsheet of accessions for FY 2022.
Download the spreadsheet of accessions for FY 2021.
Table headings are sortable by clicking on the up and down arrows next to the heading. Alternatively, you can use the search box to filter the table for key words.
This page was last reviewed on June 11, 2024.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272