SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/publications/microfilm-catalogs/biographical/part-03.html

Records of the Internal Revenue Service, Record Group 58 (cont.)
Pennsylvania, 1862-1866. M787. 107 rolls. DP.
Rhode Island, 1862-1866. M788. 10 rolls. DP.
South Carolina, 1864-1866. M789. 2 rolls. DP.
Texas, 1865-1866. M791. 2 rolls. DP.
Vermont, 1862-1866. M792. 7 rolls. DP.
Virginia, 1862-1866. M793. 6 rolls. DP.
The 1862 organizational structure of the Internal Revenue districts in the 
  State of Virginia and the new State of West Virginia remained the same even 
  after West Virginia was admitted to the Union in 1863. Therefore, records of 
  five of the counties that comprised the eastern panhandle of the new state (Morgan, 
  Berkeley, Jefferson, Hampshire, and Hardy) have been microfilmed as part of 
  the records of District 3 of Virginia. However, after the reorganization of 
  the Internal Revenue districts of the two states on May 3, 1865, the records 
  pertaining to these counties are among the West Virginia assessment returns.
West Virginia, 1862-1866. M795. 4 rolls. DP.
The 1862 organizational structure of the Internal Revenue districts in the 
  State of Virginia and the new State of West Virginia remained the same even 
  after West Virginia was admitted to the Union in 1863. Therefore, records of 
  five of the counties that comprised the eastern panhandle of the new state (Morgan, 
  Berkeley, Jefferson, Hampshire, and Hardy) have been microfilmed as part of 
  the records of District 3 of Virginia. However, after the reorganization of 
  the Internal Revenue districts of the two states on May 3, 1865, the records 
  pertaining to these counties are among the West Virginia assessment returns.
Records of the Accounting Officers of the Department of the Treasury 
  (Record Group 217)
The Office of the Fifth Auditor had responsibility for land taxes assessed 
  by the federal government in southern states during the Civil War. The records 
  from 1814 to 1925 contain accounts and records relating to the settlement of 
  accounts and claims, including these assessed land taxes.
An act of August 5, 1861, apportioned an annual direct tax of $20 million among 
  all the states and territories and the District of Columbia. Only one such annual 
  payment, however, was required because later acts suspended further collections. 
  While most states assumed the obligation to pay the tax, the states of the Confederacy, 
  plus Delaware and the Territory of Colorado, did not. The task of collecting 
  the taxes in the states that refused to assume the obligation was assigned to 
  the Office of Internal Revenue. Every parcel of land was valued and taxed in 
  proportion to the amount of tax to be paid by each state. The only microfilmed 
  list is for Tennessee.
Civil War Direct Tax Assessment Lists: Tennessee. T227. 6 rolls.
The assessment lists are arranged by county. They usually include a description 
  of the parcel of land, the number of acres and lots, valuation, tax penalty, 
  and the owner's name.
Records relating to Southern civilians, or "citizens" as they were 
  called during the Civil War, were generated by both Union occupying forces and 
  the Confederate government. This section describes selected microfilm Confederate 
  government records and records of provost marshals of the Union Army who served 
  as military police. Also listed are court records relating to the confiscation 
  of property, treasury records relating to claims resulting from the Civil War, 
  and military records relating to burials of both Southern military personnel 
  and civilians.
Records relating primarily to Confederate military service and Confederate 
  prisoners of war are described in
Military Service Records: A Select Catalog 
  of National Archives Microfilm Publications
War Department Collection of Confederate Records (Record Group 109)
The War Department Collection of Confederate Records consists of records of 
  the Confederate States of America acquired by capture or surrender at the close 
  of the Civil War and others acquired later through donation or purchase. On 
  July 21, 1865, the Secretary of War established a unit in the Adjutant General's 
  Office for the collection, safekeeping, and publication of the "rebel archives." 
  Also included in Record Group 109 are the records of the Union provost marshals. 
  Although they are records of the Union Army, they were associated with Confederate 
  records in the War Department because they relate in part to Confederate citizens 
  and sympathizers.
The Union provost marshals' duties included maintaining law and order among 
  the civilian population, maintaining the Union Army's prisons, and, to a certain 
  extent, settling disputes caused by the war itself. They sought out and arrested 
  deserters from the Union Army, some Confederate deserters, Confederate spies, 
  and civilians suspected of disloyalty; investigated the theft of government 
  property; controlled the passage of civilians in military zones and those using 
  government transportation; confined prisoners; and maintained records of paroles 
  and oaths of allegiance. Provost courts were established in some territorial 
  commands to try civilian violators of military orders and the laws of war or 
  to handle other offenses arising under the military jurisdiction. They also 
  tried military personnel accused of civil crimes.
Confederate Papers Relating to Citizens or Business Firms. M346. 1,158 
  rolls. 16mm. DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces documents that relate primarily to Confederate 
  citizens, railroads, newspapers, and companies doing business with the Confederate 
  government. The files were compiled by the U.S. War Department and contain original 
  documents, with cross-references to other compiled records and to the bound 
  records. Most of the material was originally included in money accounts of Confederate 
  quartermasters, commissaries, and other disbursing offices that had been settled 
  or were in the process of being settled by the Confederate treasury department.
The files are arranged alphabetically by name of citizen or business. Appended 
  to the descriptive pamphlet is a "Selected List of Larger Aggregations 
  of Papers in the Citizens' File." Information includes the name of the 
  individual or firm and the nature of the business or service rendered or the 
  goods furnished and dates.
Union Provost Marshals' File of Papers Relating to Individual Civilians. 
  M345. 300 rolls. 16mm. DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces a series of documents dated from 1861 
  to 1866, each of which pertains to one civilian. The series was assembled in 
  the War Department from documents extracted from the files of Union Army provost 
  marshals and from other records of Army territorial commands. Similar documents 
  referring to more than one civilian constitute the Union Provost Marshals' File 
  of Papers Relating to Two or More Civilians (reproduced on M416).
The documents reproduced in this publication relate to civilians, or "citizens" 
  as they were called during the Civil War, who came in contact with the Army. 
  The records include correspondence, provost court papers, orders, passes, paroles, 
  oaths of allegiance, transportation permits, and claims for compensation for 
  property used or destroyed by military forces.
The documents in the series reproduced in this publication are arranged alphabetically 
  by the name of the civilian concerned. The name is usually underscored on the 
  back or in the body of the document.
Union Provost Marshals' File of Papers Relating to Two or More Civilians. 
  M416. 94 rolls. DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces a series of documents dated 1861 to 
  1867, each of which pertains to two or more civilians. The index appears on 
  roll 1. The series is similar in content to the papers relating to individual 
  civilians, reproduced as M345.
Numbered documents are in numerical order from 1 to 22,737. Those reproduced 
  on rolls 2 to 72 are arranged chronologically by year and month from March 1861 
  to December 1866. Rolls 73 to 78 are arranged partly in chronological order.
Roll 83 contains unnumbered documents arranged chronologically by month from 
  January to October 1867. Rolls 84 to 86 contain lists of civilian prisoners 
  confined by the Middle Department, 8th Army Corps, at Baltimore, MD, bearing 
  various numbers from 7,893 to 21,616. They are arranged chronologically by year 
  and month from January 1864 to December 1865.
Papers relating to civilians confined in military prisons, 1862-65, on rolls 
  87 to 94, are arranged alphabetically by the location of the prison from Alton, 
  IL, to Wheeling, WV. Roll 94 also contains documents relating to the confiscation 
  and destruction of property in Missouri by Confederate forces in 1864. The first 
  part is arranged alphabetically in three subseries by the name of the claimant, 
  and the second part is not arranged.
National Archives Trust Fund Board
National Archives and Records Administration
1983, electronic rev. 1995
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272