SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/technical/vendor-training.html

The following instructions provide guidance on the proper handling of still 
  pictures, aerial film, maps, and drawings that NARA will make available for 
  copying at vendor work stations. Only vendor staff who have received NARA preservation 
  training will be permitted to handle National Archives records and historical 
  materials. Vendors should be prepared to provide whatever staff is required 
  to handle oversize records.
The image reads correctly through the base side. Copy negatives or transparencies 
  may be reversed depending on the copying method used i.e., emulsion-to-emulsion 
  copying (more typical) or emulsion-to-base copying. Look for notch codes, imprints, 
  or correct-reading writing that may be evident on the original image to verify 
  its correct orientation. Rehouse the copy according to its correct orientation 
  described below:
For housing films in envelopes with seams, the emulsion side should face away 
  from the seam side of envelopes (that is, the base side is against the seams).
In general, the emulsion side appears slightly more matte when compared to 
  the base side. However, films that have an anti-curl layer (gelatin coating) 
  on the base side or color films in general may appear equally matte or shiny 
  on both the emulsion and base side. In color films, the emulsion side may have 
  a slight surface relief when viewed in raking light. There are more accurate 
  methods to determine base from emulsion:
Roll Films (2-1/4, 35mm, slides, etc.)
Manufacturer imprinted info (such 
  as safety, Tri-X, Kodak, Estar, frame numbers) will read correctly from the 
  base side.
Sheet films with notch codes
The emulsion will be facing up, base side 
  will be facing away when the notch code is oriented so that it is located in 
  the lower right (film held horizontally, landscape orientation) or upper right 
  corner (film held vertically, portrait orientation).
Sheet films without notch codes (film packs or trimmed film)
Manufacturer 
  imprints (photographically printed) will
read correctly from 
  the base side. Manufacturer embossed or etched information (such as safety, 
  nitrate) will
read correctly from the emulsion side. Embossed 
  information is more common on older films.
Deterioration clues may verify one of the above methods. Silver mirroring--visible 
  as a silver sheen overall, in patches, or small dots--occurs only on the emulsion 
  side. Oxidation spots (red or yellow dots) also occur only on the emulsion side. 
  In deteriorated acetate film, the emulsion will be opaque black (or grey values 
  of the image) and wrinkly while the base side remains clear (and occasionally 
  wrinkly), sometimes with white crystals visible underneath.
This page was last reviewed on September 18, 2019.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272