SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/conservation/flood-damage.html

As the national repository of the records of the Federal government, the 

National Archives & Records Administration recognizes the importance of 

family records. During the mid-west floods of 1993, the staff of the National 

Archives developed some technical tips to guide individuals in emergency 

stabilization and salvage of damaged documents, photographs, books, and other 

personal papers. It is important to note that flood damage to some items may be 

irreversible. The treatment of objects of high monetary, historic, or 

sentimental value should only be performed in consultation with a conservator.
Many people are sensitive to mold. Also, some mold species are toxic. If any 

health effects are observed when treating mold consult a doctor or mycologist 

(the local extension service may be able to help) before proceeding.
The best way to prevent or stop an outbreak of mold is to remove items from 

environmental conditions that encourage mold growth: high temperature, high 

relative humidity, stagnant air, and darkness. The first priority is to dry 

moldy items (see instructions for drying below). If wet and moldy materials 

cannot be dried immediately they may be stabilized by freezing. Placing damaged 

items in a personal or commercial freezer will not kill mold. It will, however, 

put the mold in a dormant state until time and an appropriate treatment 

environment are available. Manageable quantities of frozen items may then be 

defrosted and treated at leisure.
Active mold looks fuzzy or slimy. Dormant mold is dry and powdery. Do not 

attempt to remove active mold; it may only spread or smear. Mold which remains 

active after freezing or after the host material appears dry may be treated with 

brief (1-2 hours) exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Extreme 

caution must be exercised when treating materials outdoors: too much radiation 

will accelerate deterioration and may cause fading; wind may cause physical 

damage if items are blown about; and high relative humidity or condensation 

caused by quick temperature changes may actually exacerbate mold growth.
Dormant mold spores will reactivate as soon as conditions are favorable. They 

should, therefore, be removed from items and may be brushed or vacuumed away. 

This treatment should be performed outdoors where other materials and spaces 

will not be "infected." When brushing mold use a soft, clean, light-colored 

brush and a gentle pushing motion. Change soiled brushes often to prevent 

spreading mold from one object to another. When vacuuming, screening material 

placed over the nozzle of a low suction vacuum will capture loose bits of the 

item which may inadvertently dislodge.
Paper is very fragile when it is wet. Handle it carefully. In some cases it 

may be desirable to remove caked on mud and dirt. Dirt left by receding flood 

waters may be contaminated. Precautions such as the use of rubber gloves should 

be taken. If items are still wet, agitating them in a bath of clear water will 

remove excess dirt. This treatment should never be attempted for images which 

are blurred, feathered, or faded as a result of flood damage.
Wet books, documents, or photographs which cannot be air dried within two 

days should be frozen to inhibit mold growth. Circulating air will effectively 

dry most items. Physical distortions may result, but document information will 

be saved. To provide optimal air drying conditions, fans should be positioned 

for maximum air circulation (do not aim air flow directly at drying materials). 

Blotting material for air drying should be clean and absorbent. Options include: 

blotter paper, unprinted newsprint paper, paper towels, rags, mattress pads, 

etc. Screening material (such as window screens) well supported and stacked with 

space between them provide an excellent compact drying surface. The porous 

surface assists air circulation and promotes drying.
Without intervention glossy materials such as paperback book covers, 

magazines, art books, etc. are likely to stick together. If they are highly 

valued, these items should be the first priority for salvage. Loose glossy 

materials should be spread out in one layer for air drying. Bound glossy 

materials must be interleaved between every page to prevent sticking. Wax paper 

should be used as interleaving material. Volumes of glossy paper dried in this 

way may suffer considerable physical distortion.
Place interleaving material between the text block and the front and back 

covers. If time and supplies allow interleaving material should be placed 

intermittently throughout the text as well. Fan volumes open and stand them on 

edge with the interleaving paper extending beyond the edges of the book. 

Evaporation of water as it wicks into the interleaving paper will enhance 

drying. Replace interleaving paper as it becomes soaked and invert the volume 

each time to insure even drying.
Air dry flat in small piles (1/2 inch) or individually if possible. Change 

blotting material beneath the materials as it becomes soaked.
Photographs, Negatives, Motion Picture Film
Several classes of photographs are highly susceptible to water damage and the 

recovery rate will be very low. Avoid touching the surface of photographic 

prints and negatives. If an old photographic process cannot be identified, 

observe the item carefully and contact a conservator for advice. Never freeze 

old photographs or negatives.
Most prints, negatives, and slides may successfully be individually air dried 

face up. Change blotting material beneath the photographs as it becomes soaked. 

Contemporary photographic prints and negatives which are still wet and have 

stuck together may separate after soaking in cold water. However, this type of 

treatment could cause irreversible damage. Highly valued items, especially 

prints for which there is no longer a negative, should be referred to a 

conservator immediately.
Remove the backing material from the frame. If the item is not stuck to the 

glass, carefully remove it from the frame and air dry. If the object appears to 

be stuck to the glass, do not attempt to remove it from the frame. Dry intact 

with the glass side down.
Occasionally object damage is irreversible. The treatment of items of high 

monetary, historic, or sentimental value should only be performed in 

consultation with a conservator. Decisions about the treatment of materials 

belonging to an institution should only be made by appropriate personnel. The 

American Institute for Conservation (202-452-9545) maintains a referral list of 

conservators who will be able to provide guidance for treating private 

collections.
This publication was produced as a public service. It may be reproduced and 

distributed freely in part or in its entirety. When duplicating individual 

articles please copy them exactly as they appear so that proper credit will be 

given to the originating institution.
The editors of this publication will be collaborating on additional projects. 

If there are issues which you would like to see addressed in the future please 

send your ideas to:
Preservation Programs
National Archives at College Park
College Park, MD 20740-6001
Disaster Preparedness Table of 

Contents
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272