SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/formats/motion-picture-film-important-characteristics

Kodak released the first flexible transparent roll film in 1889. Using the new film, technical innovators created cameras and projectors that recorded a series of still images and displayed them to audiences by shining a beam of light through the film and projecting it on a screen. Unlike audio and video formats, which regularly become obsolete as technology moves on, motion picture film has been standardized for over onw hundred years.
The first thing to do when you think you may have a film that needs preservation, is confirm that the object is, in fact, a motion picture film. Over time, the words "film" and "video" have come to be used interchangeably, but they are different media with different preservation needs. When opening a container of film in uncertain condition, lift the lid so that it is facing away from the face to prevent the inhalation of any byproducts of deterioration.
Films may be in many types of containers. On the left is a shipping box used for 16mm prints. In the center image, a film has been wound onto a metal reel for projection. Films may also be on plastic cores.
Simplified diagram of layers on color film. Adapted from diagram on Kodak.com. Other layers not shown here include a thin gelatin emulsion layer to protect the light sensitive layer and a binder adhering the emulsion to the base.
is the layer of plastic that supports the images, sound, and other information contained in the emulsion. There are three main types of film bases: nitrate, acetate, and polyester.
is the part of the film that actually contains the image. The emulsion is composed of gelatin and photo-sensitive materials that, when exposed to light and processed through chemical baths, result in an image. There have been hundreds of different emulsion types in the history of film. You can read more about some of these different films and see images in
This page was last reviewed on October 25, 2023.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272