SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/environmental-control/realistic-preservation-environment.html

There is a popular misconception that a realistic environmental criteria to 

preserve artifacts is that which is a compromise between opposed needs of the 

building, the occupant, and the collection at a cost which an institution is 

willing to pay. This philosophy completely misses the mark. Too much of our 

history has been lost using this rationale.
A realistic environment is not a compromise where two extremes are averaged 

into one, such that neither is appropriate. But rather, it is a balance in which 

the different needs can all be satisfied through a realistic analysis of factual 

data followed by cost conscious design choices to achieve that end, both in 

first cost and operating cost.
In the "realistic" world, this philosophy is often easier said than done. But 

it's not really all that difficult, so long as the design choices focus on 

factual measured data, from both the past as well as the present.
How then does one achieve this cost conscious balance? There are over 8,000 

different combinations of climate control design choices in the commercial 

marketplace today. Only a step-by-step logical process of analysis will succeed 

in arriving at the one choice most appropriate. It is a team process which can 

be divided into the three following steps:
Classification System
A classification system has been developed by Landmark Facilities Group, 

Inc., in which all buildings or individual room spaces are divided into 

classification categories.
Each category represents structures of similar thermal characteristics 

limitations. The kinds of collections each group might house safely is then 

identified. Occupancy limitations are also given. In all, there are three 

climate control categories. They are: uncontrolled, partially controlled, and 

climate controlled. Each has two sub-level classifications.
summarizes the classification system and
presents preservation approach examples.
- An uncontrolled building would have no 

installed systems for heating or cooling.
Type I - No Mechanical Devices
- A Type I structure is the 

simplest form of construction which is an open structure. Examples would include 

objects such as covered bridge, open sawmill, a privy, stocks, a well or gazebo. 

Environmental conditions in this Type I structure would essentially equal the 

outdoors. In temperate climates the temperature would likely range from 100°F 

(38°C) in summer to -10°F (-25°C) in winter. Humidity levels would range from 

saturation (100%RH) down to lows of perhaps 20%RH. It is noted that it is rare 

for humidity levels to fall below 20%RH in an unheated structure. The overall 

annual humidity range in a Type I structure would then be +/-40%RH.
The kinds of collections that may fare well in a Type I structure would be 

hardy materials such as farm tools, wagons, sculptures and the like. This is a 

good location to use reproductions or common materials which can be readily 

replaced. Obviously, these buildings would have no comfort occupancy use.
Type II - Ventilation Only
- A Type II structure, also has 

no systems for heating or cooling, but it is enclosed on its sides and above for 

basic weather protection. Examples would be sheathed post and beam buildings 

such as a barn, shed, silo, cabin, or icehouse. Environmental conditions would 

be naturally improved over a Type I structure slightly, however infiltration 

rates would be high and day/night thermal "coast" would be small. Exhaust fans 

and natural venting would help reduce summer high temperatures and high 

humidities. In winter, it would rarely fall much below freezing inside and the 

natural infiltration would help dilute unwanted, internal moisture levels. 

Temperature would generally range from 90°F (36°C) to 32°F (0°C) over a years 

time. With no heating, humidity levels may likely vary from a high of 90%RH to a 

low of around 30%RH, or 30%RH year round.
The kinds of collections that would be relatively safe in these structures 

would be hardy collections. These might consist of tools, machinery, wagons, 

carriages and vehicles. Again, educational reproductions and other common 

materials would be appropriate here.
In a museum setting, none of these buildings would have comfort occupancy use 

except for specific events such as perhaps an open hearth cooking demonstration.
- Buildings in the partial control category 

have some kind of mechanical systems installed to produce temperature control 

only. No specific devices are installed to add or remove moisture in a precision 

fashion.
Type III - Heating and Ventilation
- Type III structure 

would have a practical limit of climate control consisting of simple low level 

tempered heating and exhaust ventilation. Typical construction features would 

consist of wood framing and siding or masonry. Windows would be single glazed 

and no insulation materials or vapor retarders would be present. Examples would 

be a rough frame house, boat, train, lighthouse, carriage house, or industrial 

workshop. By combining the use of exhaust fans in summer and minimum heating in 

winter, temperature conditions might likely be controlled between 80°F (26°C) in 

summer and 50°F (10°C) in winter. With no specific humidity control devices, 

humidity levels would likely drift from a high of 70%RH to a low of 30%RH. Thus, 

the usual range of humidity would be +/-20%RH.
The kinds of collections that might be relatively safe within these 

facilities would cover a fairly broad range of materials which are not sensitive 

to fluctuations. Simple period room furnishings, hardy textiles, metals, 

ceramics, and common household goods would be reasonably protected. Highly 

restrained collections such as inlays or extremely sensitive compounds should be 

removed during seasonal extremes or separately controlled using buffered cases 

or similar.
It is important to recognize that wintertime occupancy would not be 

permissible in rooms where these collections are exhibited or stored. Room 

temperature must be maintained below the normal comfort range at these times.
- A Type IV structure would have a 

ducted system of heating and cooling. The system may also be capable of limited 

humidification and dehumidification re-heat depending upon the specific 

building's perimeter envelope construction. Typical building construction 

features would be heavy masonry walls or composite framing with plastered walls 

over several layers of wood. The general construction would be tight with low 

infiltration. Modest insulation characteristics would be present, along with 

storm windows. Attics would be insulated and vented to the outdoors. Examples of 

buildings would be a finished home, church, meeting place, store, inn or modern 

commercial building.
With an ability for year round temperature control and limited humidity 

control, environmental conditions in a Type IV building that holds collections 

would range in temperature from 75°F (24°C) in summer to about 60°F (15°C) in 

winter. Winter ambient above 60°F (15°C) could only be permitted with active 

monitoring in place to demonstrate a condensation free perimeter envelope. 

Relative humidity could be held below 60% RH in summer and around 30%RH in 

winter. Thus, the year-round humidity range would be +/-15 %RH.
The kinds of collections that would be relatively safe in these buildings 

would cover a host of museum materials including books and other paper-based 

collections.
Again, it must be recognized that winter occupancy must be limited in these 

facilities in order to protect both the building and the collections. Continued 

monitoring must be employed to assure the safety of this delicate balance.
- Buildings in the climate controlled 

category are generally specifically designed from their outset to be humidified 

structures. Few buildings fit in this category naturally. Systems in these 

buildings have the ability to accurately control both temperature and humidity 

levels year round.
Type V - Climate Control with Drift
- Type V facilities are 

equipped with ducted HVAC systems which also contain devices to mechanically 

humidify and perform process logic to dehumidify. These systems may be capable 

of year-round constant climate control without any drift, but are chosen not to 

function that way. Scheduled seasonal drift is intentionally selected by the 

user for either of two reasons. One reason might be the building simply can not 

tolerate outdoor winter extremes without condensation forming at its perimeter 

envelope. The other reason may be basic cost economics relating to the intense 

energy consumption required to achieve summertime room ambient conditions of 

certain temperatures and relative humidities. Buildings in the Type V group are 

all well insulated structures having at least double glazing, good vapor 

retardant characteristics, and vestibules leading to the outside. Examples of 

these buildings would be museums, research libraries, galleries, and storage 

buildings.
By having complete climate control capability and accurate controls devices, 

temperature and humidity environments in these facilities can generally be 

chosen at will. Reasonable ranges of conditions might be a summer high 

temperature of 75°F (24°C) and an occupant winter comfort of 70°F (21 CC). Over 

the course of a year, the humidity levels may be chosen to drift from, perhaps, 

a winter low of 35%RH to a summer high of 55%RH. This would yield an overall 

annual humidity range of +/-10%. Controls instrumentation in these facilities 

would need to have an accuracy of about +/-1°F and +/-2%RH.
The kinds of collections that would likely be safe in these structures would 

consist of all, but the most delicate of materials. Museum quality collections 

of fine arts, inlays, conserved collections, and finely crafted arts should all 

be safe here. There would be no occupancy restrictions relating to user comfort 

in these facilities.
Type VI - Special Constant Environments
- Type VI facilities 

are specifically constructed to accommodate specialized environmental needs for 

a particular purpose. Precision climate control systems with specialty 

components are employed. These structures are generally small in size due to 

their high construction cost and operating cost. Examples are vaults, storage 

rooms, and specialty cases or enclosures.
Environmental conditions in these structures are specifically designed for 

their contents and are held constant within the limits of the chosen technology 

of precision accuracy. Temperature could likely be maintained between 70°F (21 

°C) and 68°F (2°C) year round. Humidity levels might be selected to range 

between 50%RH and 40%RH or even smaller. This range presented is an overall 

annual +/-5 %RH. Controls instrumentation in these facilities would have an 

accuracy of +/-1°F and +/-1%RH or less.
These facilities are what might be considered the "intensive care" rooms for 

materials deemed to need special care. The materials might include unique 

minerals, chemically damaged objects such as some bronzes, composite materials 

with mismatched expansion coefficients, some photographs and perhaps extremely 

old materials.
Only limited access would be permitted in these facilities. Human comfort 

would have no priority; only the collections would be protected.
Once the natural thermal limits of a structure are known, it is then put to 

the test mathematically, as six heat loads are imposed on it. These heat loads 

are as follows:
By understanding the timing dynamics of these six heat loads and their 

magnitudes, a design team can avoid their unwanted characteristics as a design 

prerequisite and thus become magically "cost conscious."
THE MOISTURE INVENTORY
The third, and last analysis step involves the understanding of moisture 

behavior quantitatively. Numerous text books publish tables of moisture 

generation rates of various activities. By using these in the design process the 

team can actually take advantage of them for establishing a particular desired 

moisture equilibrium condition in a room. One can also gain a perspective of the 

significance between the various sources of moisture into a room.
For example, potted plants in a room are usually insignificant when compared 

to a person taking a shower. Both are small compared to a wet basement. By 

knowing the potential moisture generation rates of activities from these tables, 

a design team can avoid the disasters of inadequate water proofing and not get 

bogged down in excessive costs to isolate a decorative water feature.
Taking all this data and formulating it into an appropriate climate control 

solution is a task best left to experienced professionals. By combining their 

efforts in a team decision making process, the balance will occur, it will be 

cost effective, and a successful outcome will be enjoyed.
Ernest Conrad, President, Landmark Facilities Group, Inc.
Landmark Facilities Group is an engineering firm specializing in climate 

control for museums, special collections, and historic facilities. The firm also 

designs mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and fire pro

tections systems for 

commercial, industrial, and retail applications.
March 1999 Conference Table of Contents
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272