SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/education/distance-learning/high

Visit the National Archives without leaving your classroom! Our free, interactive programs feature primary sources from our holdings. Each program aligns with National Social Studies Standards and Common Core State Standards. We also provide teacher guides with pre- and post-program lessons.
We can deliver up to two distance learning sessions per school per day. For schools requesting more than two sessions, we recommend connecting two classes at the same time or scheduling programs over multiple days.
Technology Requirements
You can connect your class via traditional videoconferencing equipment or online via a computer with a webcam, microphone, and speakers. These programs can also accommodate students connecting from home.
distancelearning@nara.gov
to request your program today!
The Declaration of Independence, Constitution, and Bill of Rights
Students will analyze opening passages of the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights. They will create a graphic organizer to help them distinguish the founding documents by their purpose. Next, students will match document excerpts to each excerpt’s origin – the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, or the Bill of Rights. The program will conclude with a discussion about the legacy of these founding documents.
Woman Suffrage Parade in Washington, DC, 3/3/1913
Using the founding documents of the United States and records of the National Archives, students will determine how and why women fought for the right to vote. Students will explore the challenges suffragists faced and discover why the fight for women’s voting rights persisted even after the ratification of the 19th Amendment.
Engrossed Declaration of Independence.
Students will explore the Declaration of Independence as an artifact, a primary source, and a persuasive text. Students explore the document's important sections, and evaluate the persuasive elements of the Declaration of Independence.
This program is offered as a part of
, an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
Civil Rights Event at the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, 3/5/2000
Using the Constitution, constitutional amendments, legislation, and a Supreme Court case, students will explore the progression of voting rights in the United States with particular focus on the effort to lower the voting age to 18. Additional primary source documents from the National Archives, including photographs, video recordings, and political cartoons, will enhance student understanding of the ways in which contemporary events and public civic engagement influence their lives today.
This program is offered as a part of
, an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
Kindergarten Class at Tule Lake "Segregation" Center, 9/1944
In this program, students will explore the Bill of Rights and how it outlines both limits on government and the rights of the people. We will work together to analyze three case studies that underscore the remedies that citizens can use to address instances where their rights have been violated. This program will introduce students to the Bill of Rights and strengthen their civic understanding.
This program is offered as a part of
, an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
Elementary School Programs
Middle School Programs
is an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
Learn more about our regularly scheduled webinars and by-request programs
This page was last reviewed on February 25, 2026.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272