SOURCE: https://www.worldhistory.org/Polycrates/

This text is available in other languages:
Polycrates (r. c. 535-522 BCE) was the tyrant of
who established Samian naval supremacy in the eastern
and strove for control of the Aegean Sea and mainland towns of
in the 6th century BCE. Polycrates had a successful career until the Persian Oroetus (r. c. 530-520 BCE) lured him to the mainland and had him crucified.
tyrants originally arose in the 7th century BCE from conflict between aristocratic families seeking total authority over the communities. They employed appealing propagandistic policies to gain the favor and regard of the general public. This tactic may also be seen in modern times when dictators use populistic appeals to the lower classes to conceal other heinous crimes. The Greek tyrants were numerous, some of the most worth noting were Cypselus of
The strategic location of Samos was crucial for the rapid generation of wealth by the local elites. The favorable geographical position of the Samos and its surrounding islands endorsed the Samian control of the merchant ships passing by, capturing the majority of the cargo transported from the eastern
Sea to the Aegean Sea and the Hellespont. Thus, since the 8th century BCE, the dawn of
, Samians had created a plundering mentality to survive. That lifestyle of plunder was fused with a strong affinity with the goddess
must have been erected after 800 BCE. With its impressive length of 30,5 meters (100 ft), this temple was one of the earliest and biggest temples found in the archaeological records, reflecting Hera's central role in the local community. The construction of a new Hera temple is almost the only other event that can be traced back to the reigns of the pre-Polycratean rulers.
The scene for the tyrant Polycrates' reign is set by the invasion of
(c. 600-530 BCE), the king and founder of the Persian
looked towards the west, he must have had a significant numerical advantage against
(r. c. 585-546 BCE), the king of
, despite the fact that Croesus had signed a treaty of hospitality and alliance with
. After Cyrus' presence in Lydia was established, it appears that the Greeks dispatched no troops to
, the capital. Cyrus struck in the midst of winter, catching the Lydian army off guard, and planned a fight at the
near Sardis in 547 BCE. Croesus was obliged to seek refuge in the citadel, but the
fell within 14 days. When Cyrus entered Sardis, Croesus surrendered and became Cyrus' vassal. As a result, the aspirant
king controlled Lydia, a neighboring area of Samos. The western expansion of the Persian ruler forced the Samian elite to change their economic policy and redirect their plundering assaults toward the west.
was rife when the infamous Samian tyrant Polycrates, the son of Aeaces, grew up, and this may have inspired the blooming tales of a Samian thalassocracy – a naval dominion to arise. The history of Polycrates is mainly attested by Herodotus (c. 484-425/413 BCE), the Greek historian from
. Although Polycrates is mentioned in other primary sources such as
(384-322 BCE), the most concluded and remarkably detailed version comes from Herodotus.
Polycrates' ancestors are not clearly established, and no transparent information exists on them. Two names appear before Polycrates: Syloson, who ruled Samos as a tyrant c. 590 BCE, and Aeaces, the probable father of Polycrates. Polycrates was probably born in the 570s BCE, followed by his two brothers Pantagnotos and Syloson. The earliest phase of Polycrates' reign was shared by his two brothers until he had Pantagnotos executed and Syloson exiled to Persia. According to the Bithynian author Polyaenus (c. 2nd century BCE), the tyrant seized power during the grand festival outside of the city walls, dedicated to Hera, the island's most celebrated deity. The works of Asius, the 6th-century BCE Samian poet, and Duris (c. 350 to c. 281 BCE), the
ruler of Samos, support Polyaenus' description.
Polycrates' career seems to have followed a similar pattern as the rest of the Greek tyrants. He probably started his coup d'etat by capturing the Samian
, located in the center of the ancient city. Furthermore, the brothers were supported by many citizens who could afford a panoply; it is possible that these men were from Polycrates' immediate family or sympotic group. Their small number could imply there was no serious opposition to the coup, so the bulk of the aristocrats or the mass of the
(Greek citizens) or both were either apathetic or positively in favor. A preserved passage from Duris'
describes how Polycrates arranged for the mothers of those who died in the
to be cared for by Samos' wealthiest people. This extract could probably indicate propaganda to reconcile the public.
Polycrates must have been a popular man, but those who opposed his reign, typically members of the old aristocracy, were either sent into exile or voluntarily left the island. The most famous was the philosopher
(c. 570-495 BCE), who went to
, while others settled in Dicaearchia (Puteoli) near Naples. The change to the Lydo-Milesian
standard popular among traders facilitated easier exchange in Persian territories from c. 525 BCE. Polycrates' introduction of exotic animals has often been seen as evidence of an attempt to bolster the economy and maybe to please the aristocrats that surrounded him. The variety of the imports justifies Polycrates' well-deserved sailing reputation. The years c. 570-530 BCE also saw the creation of the most exceptional and well-known Samian sculptures. Since Polycrates was born and reigned during these decades, both ancient and modern scholars associated him with the arts, although, there is no evidence to support such claims.
A passage of Anacreon (c. 582- 485 BCE) suggests a Samian attempt to influence the city of Magnesia on the Meander through propaganda, which promotes the evidence for an invasion. As the Persians were too powerful on the mainland, Polycrates could not have permanently occupied Ionian
or linked them to Samos in a tribute alliance. Thus, Greeks living near the sea did not establish colonies to obtain supplies of grain and other commodities; they would have frequently captured ships instead. The theory of looting and plundering everybody equally may be the most accurate description of the thalassocracy, and many residents would have benefitted from plunder via employment in the fleet. Nevertheless, Herodotus says that the islanders submitted to Cyrus.
At first, Polycrates merely exploited the geopolitical situation and had the support of Lygdamis (r. c. 546-524 BCE), the tyrant of
, who had been put in power by Peisistratus sometime after 546 BCE. Additionally, an alliance between the
Amasis II (r. 570-526 BCE) and Polycrates is documented by Herodotus. Fearing a Persian attack, Amasis developed a naval strategy, built a navy, hired Carian and Greek mercenaries, conquered
, and allied himself with Polycrates. Amasis also gave Polycrates a large sum of money, which the Samian used to build 100 ships, each with 50 rowers and ten archers. This contribution could have cost approximately eight tons of
The fleet of Polycrates, which was most likely composed, at least in part, of a special design known as the
underwent several innovations in the
. During the 6th century BCE, changes to the
's design were made in the Aegean to make it a better vessel for transporting goods and soldiers, as well as a warship. Due to the threat posed by the Persian expansion in the 540s BCE, it is plausible that a coastal
) like Samos maintained a
fleet regardless of the expense.
(c. 45-50 CE to c. 120-125 CE) says that Polycrates commissioned a special type of ship, the
was supposed to be bigger and more spacious than the ordinary two-level
. It was both decked and swift and stable enough for open-sea excursions. Greek naval
at the time was gradually shifting away from the archaic method of boarding the enemy ships and fighting hand-to-hand or overpowering the opponent with missile volleys.
After the death of Cyrus in 530 BCE, Polycrates decided to switch sides and join the new Persian king
(r. 530-522 BCE). When Cambyses purchased the formidable Phoenician navy in the 520s BCE, Samian piracy became limited to the
' poorer cities. Thus, when the loot from the sailing ventures stopped flowing, the Samian aristocracy saw an opportunity to destabilize the tyrant. As the Persian influence increased towards the west, it was no longer safe not to be Amasis' enemy, and so Polycrates dispatched 40 ships to aid Cambyses' invasion of Egypt. The dispute with Amasis may have hampered
of Egypt would put things right for the Samian. It must be noted that according to the ancient sources the admiral of the Egyptian navy also changed sides, so it is possible that Cambyses prepared his Egyptian expedition by bribing away Amasis' naval allies.
The naval attack was also a chance for Polycrates to get rid of disgruntled residents by loading the ships with them. Their relatively gentle, or at least covert, removal suggests that the majority of them were influential individuals. Their removal, however, had far-reaching implications, as they made their way to the
and convinced Sparta and Corinth to prepare an expedition against Polycrates. Two possible reasons can be provided for Sparta's involvement: revenge for the theft of Spartan gifts or the repaying of a debt of gratitude, which scholars identified as an act of negative reciprocity. Corinth's involvement can be traced back to the memory of how Samos had once interfered with a plan of its ruler,
(d. c. 587 BCE), to punish
, a Corinthian colony. The interaction between Sparta and the Samian nobles supplied the impetus for the Spartans' first-ever Aegean voyage. An early
for them and the Corinthians was followed by a 40-day siege of the city that proved unsuccessful. The Peloponnesian intervention made it obvious that Samian piracy in the Cyclades would no longer be tolerated.
In March 522 BCE, civil war broke out in the
. During the summer, Polycrates was invited by the
of Lydia, Oroetus, to come to
to continue his ventures. According to Herodotus, Polycrates' daughter had a terrible nightmare, in which she saw how her father was washed by the
and anointed by the Sun.
And Polycrates hanging in the air fulfilled his daughter's vision in every detail; for he was washed by Zeus when it rained, and he was anointed by
as he exuded sweat from his body. (
When the chaos in the Persian
(r. 522-486 BCE) restored order by executing Oroetus and conquering Samos. Syloson, the exiled brother of Polycrates, had met
in Egypt and gifted him a red cloak when the king was one of Cambyses' guards. Now that Darius was king, Syloson requested to return to Samos without bloodshed, and he governed Samos as a vassal ruler on behalf of the Achaemenid Persian Empire.
We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and
translate this definition
into another language!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. Please support free history education for millions of learners worldwide for only
per month by becoming a member. Thank you!
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. Please support free history education for millions of learners worldwide for only
per month by becoming a member. Thank you!
Fountoukis, A. (2022, June 01). Polycrates.
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Polycrates/
Fountoukis, Athanasios. "Polycrates."
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Polycrates/
Fountoukis, Athanasios. "Polycrates."
World History Encyclopedia
https://www.worldhistory.org/Polycrates/
Athanasios Fountoukis
, published on 01 June 2022. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license:
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
. This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included.
Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.
History delivered to you once a week:
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization publishing free history content that has been carefully researched and reviewed.
            If you liked this content, please consider donating at
www.worldhistory.org/donate/
.
            To remove this message from printouts, you can become a supporting member at
www.worldhistory.org/membership/
.
            Thank you for supporting our work!
Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including
.
                We have been reviewed for educational use by
Common Sense Education
Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin)
Merlot (California State University)
School Library Journal
.
                Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our former name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.
World History Foundation
is a 501(c)3 charity registered in the United States.
World History Publishing
is a non-profit organization registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation
is a non-profit organization registered in Québec, Canada.
Some Rights Reserved (2009-2026) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.
The World History Encyclopedia logo is a