SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/formats/motion-picture-film-playback-digitize.html

Proceed with caution when attempting to view old films. Some films may exhibit obvious signs of deterioration and fragility (see
) while others may only appear to be in good condition, when in fact they are too warped or brittle to run through any kind of viewing device. Films shot in the past few decades and stored properly may be safe to run on a projector, but only if you know that the projector has been properly maintained, and only if the film is in good condition. Preservation copies held in archival institutions should never be projected. If you are unsure of a film’s content, consider viewing individual frames with a magnifying glass. This will allow you to safely assess subject matter before attempting projection.
Photochemical duplication of motion picture film is a complicated process requiring the right equipment and expertise. Consult a professional laboratory to create high-quality preservation and access copies of your film. Be sure to retain original materials after duplication, as they may outlast your copy and be required for future reference. Original materials may also be of use for discerning production dates, editing choices, printing techniques, and other valuable information.
Most professional post production houses will be able to scan your film while handling it safely. The National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) website includes a list of
vendors in the Washington, DC, area
that are approved to handle our motion picture records when patrons request a broadcast-quality transfer. If you would like to find a provider in your area that can perform similar work, do an online search using the terms “film post production facilities” near your location, or visit an
Laboratories Directory
on the Kodak website will direct you to full-service photochemical labs that can make new film copies for preservation purposes.
The Association of Moving Image Archivists (AMIA) also provides the
Video and Film Supplier Directory
You should ask the vendor for a
to be stored for the long-term and for an
to make your content easily viewable.
Digital preservation copies generally have the following characteristics:
Access copies generally have the following characteristics:
Digital preservation files are typically large in size, and may comprise several hundred gigabytes of data. Access copies are much smaller in size, but may also pose a difficulty when considering a large quantity of files. Some vendors may offer the option of cloud storage or online file delivery, but these are not recommended as the sole file delivery method as data transfer may be slow or costly. Physical storage media, such as hard drives and data tapes, are instead preferred for the delivery of motion picture files. Be prepared to make a backup copy, such as an extra hard drive or cloud storage, to ensure the safety and longevity of your records. Physical media can fail, and will also need to be migrated to new media over time. You must choose the solution that is best for you while also understanding its limitations. More information is in the
You may request that the vendor name your files and organize them in a certain way. Archives sometimes use a
to name their files; these can be auto-generated or they may be more meaningful identifiers that provide information about the content or creator of the item (similar to a library book’s call number).
You may also want to ask the vendor to incorporate
in your files. Metadata is basically information about your data. You may want to include descriptive information like a title, date, location or occasion in your metadata. You could also request that the vendor include technical metadata about what type of hardware and software was used to digitize your materials.
can also be a valuable tool to ensure that your data does not change over time.
This page was last reviewed on December 10, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272