SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/isoo/oversight-groups/nisppac

Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO)
To ensure a more timely response to your inquiry, please contact us via email at [
].  ISOO will use its blog,
to communicate with stakeholders on all ISOO matters.  Please join for weekly posts.
The National Industrial Security Program Policy Advisory Committee (NISPPAC), comprised of both Government and industry representatives, is responsible for recommending changes in industrial security policy through modifications to Executive Order 12829, its implementing directives, and the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual. The NISPPAC also advises the Information Security Oversight Office on all matters concerning the policies of the
National Industrial Security Program (NISP)
, including recommended changes to those policies, and serves as a forum to discuss policy issues in dispute.
The National Industrial Security Program Policy Advisory Committee, was created on January 8, 1993, by the President under Section 103 of
Executive Order 12829, "National Industrial Security Program
The NISPPAC members advise the Chair of the Committee on all matters concerning the policies of the National Industrial Security Program, including recommending changes to those policies as reflected in the Order, its implementing directives, or the operating manual established under the Order, and serves as a forum to discuss policy issues in dispute.
The Director of the Information Security Oversight
Office serves as Chair of the Committee and appoints members of the Committee. The members of the Committee are representatives of those departments and agencies most affected by the National Industrial Security Program and non-government representatives of contractors, licensees, or grantees involved with classified contracts, licenses, or grants, as determined by the Chair. The
includes 16 representatives from executive branch agencies (including the Chair) and eight representatives from industry. The NISPPAC meets at least twice a year at the discretion of the Chair and the meetings are open to the public.
Resources for Industry Information
This organization provides industry to gain a better understanding of the non-governmental member's involvement in order to help the community stay abreast of the ever-changing security posture. It is maintained by NCMS and provides building blocks in the development of security professionals through in-depth training, mentoring, and certification; as well as offering the industry a voice at the national security policy level.
ISOO does not provide content on this site and does not endorse NCMS or its membership. It is solely an additional resource for industry to gain useful security information. Questions regarding this site should be directed to NCMS directly.
This page was last reviewed on September 18, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272