SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/emergency-prep/disaster-prep-primer.html

In the past several years, the United States has suffered major disasters 

ranging from earthquakes in California to hurricanes in Miami. These disasters 

often cause severe and ongoing destruction in the form of water damage to 

cultural property, the most vulnerable being books, documents, and other 

paper-based materials. On such occasions the Conservation Analytical Laboratory 

- Smithsonian Institution (CAL-SI), Library of Congress (LC), National Archives 

and Records Administration (NARA), and National Park Service (NPS) receive 

increased requests for information on disaster preparedness, management, and 

response for the salvage of books, documents, and other paper-based materials.
In order to facilitate a pro-active rather than reactive approach to disaster 

preparation with respect to cultural property, four basic references currently 

issued separately from CAL, LC, NARA, and NPS have been updated and combined 

into this single pamphlet. The editors hope that this streamlined publication 

will provide sound introductory information to private individuals and public 

institutions in preparing for either small or large scale events.
The SI handbook presents guidelines for general facilities preparation and 

response to a variety of events both natural (storms, floods) and man-made 

(hazardous material accidents). The NARA article addresses small-scale events 

and procedures for the general public to be used for the immediate response 

action for water damaged documents, photographs, etc. The LC booklet provides 

more in-depth information for both public and private collections dealing with a 

larger, longer-term coordinated program to salvage bound volumes. Finally, the 

NPS Conserve O Gram supplies specific information about dealing with the 

prevention and treatment of mold, a frequent consequence of water damage.
Since little information has been published in Spanish pertinent to the 

salvage and recovery of cultural property, this consolidated brochure will be
as well as in English.
CAL-SI, LC, NARA, and NPS all have additional guidelines and publications on 

a variety of preservation and conservation topics available to the general and 

professional public upon request:
Conservation Analytical Laboratory
Museum Support 

Center
Smithsonian Institution
Preservation Policy & Services Division
National Archives at College 

Park
College Park, MD 20740-6001
Preservation Directorate, LMG-21
101 Independence 

Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20540-4500
Curatorial Services Division
National Park Service
800 North Capitol, 

Suite 230
A Collaborative Publication Sponsored by
the Conservation Analytical 

Laboratory
and the Office of Risk Management, SI;
the Preservation Policy 

and Services Division, NARA;
the Preservation Directorate, LC;
and the 

Curatorial Services Division, NPS.
In commemoration of Arts and Humanities Month and Hispanic Heritage Month 

October 1993.
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
Office of Risk Management:
Jacqueline Young, Assistant Director
Priscilla Terry, Risk Manager
Conservation Analytical Laboratory:
Lambertus van Zelst, Director
Dianne van der Reyden, Senior Paper 

Conservator
Ronald Bishop, Senior Researcher
Alan Postlethwaite, Deputy 

Director
NATIONAL ARCHIVES & RECORDS ADMINISTRATION
Preservation Policy & Services Division:
Cynthia G. Fox, Acting Director
Diana Alper, Regional Preservation 

Coordinator
Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler, Supervisory Conservator
Shirley Clarkson, Acting Public Affairs Officer
Susan Cooper, Public 

Affairs Specialist
Thomas King, Marketing Specialist
Preservation Directorate:
Diane Nester Kresh, Acting Director
Peter Waters, Preservation Strategic 

Planning Officer
Amparo de Torres, Assistant to the Conservation Officer
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
Curatorial Services Division:
Ann Hitchcock, Chief Curator
Virginia Kilby, Staff Curator
Anthony 

Knapp, Staff Curator
Diane Vogt-O'Connor, Archivist
Division of Conservation:
Jane Merritt, Textile Conservator
Disaster Preparedness Table of Contents
This web version was prepared in 1999, 

based on:
A Primer on Disaster Preparedness, Management and Response: 

Paper-Based Materials
: Selected Reprints issued by: Smithsonian 

Institution, National Archives and Records Administration, Library of Congress, 

and National Park Service. A Collaborative Publication Sponsored by the 

Conservation Analytical Laboratory and the Office of Risk Management, 

Smithsonian Institution; the Preservation Policy and Services Division, NARA; 

the Preservation Directorate, Library of Congress; and the Curatorial Services 

Division, National Park Service. In commemoration of Arts and Humanities Month 

and Hispanic Heritage Month (October 1993). Printed in English and Spanish by 

the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, 1993: pages. This version may 

differ from the printed version.
This page was last reviewed on October 11, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272