SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/conservation/library-materials-07.html

COLD TEMPERATURE STORAGE CONDITIONS
The size and formation of ice crystals is governed by the rate and 

temperature of freezing. Blast freezing used for certain types of food-stuffs is 

designed to quickly freeze in a few hours, often involving temperatures in 

excess of -50 degrees Celsius. The advantage of quick freezing is that ice 

crystals are kept very small, resulting in a limited amount of swelling. 

Availability of blast freezing facilities may not be possible following water 

damage, so in normal circumstances, freezing will be slower and therefore the 

formation of ice crystals larger, but this should not cause problems for the 

majority of library and archive collections.
Once frozen, cold temperature conditions should be maintained at about 0
Celsius). Lower temperatures will do no harm but higher 

temperatures may increase the size of ice crystals.
PREPARATION FOR FREEZING
Before freezing, it may seem tempting to wash away accumulated debris 

particularly if this is the result of a river flood, but this is rarely 

advisable or safe because of lack of time, skilled workers and a pure water 

supply, and the quantity of material to be handled. (Aqueous washing to remove 

smoke damage should never be attempted under any circumstances).
Washing should never be attempted by untrained persons as this will cause 

further damage, nor should time be taken for this purpose if so little skilled 

help is available that any significant delay in freezing the bulk of the 

materials would result. The washing of materials containing water-soluble 

components, such as inks, watercolors, tempera or dyes should not be attempted 

under any circumstances.
Experience has shown that such materials, as well as those that are fragile 

or delicate, can be seriously or irreparably damaged by untrained workers 

attempting to clean and restore on-site. Such materials need expert attention 

and hours of careful work if damage is to be kept to a minimum. The period of 

emergency action and þfirst aidþ is a dangerous and unsuitable time for the 

careful work required to restore materials to near-original state. The general 

condition of the damaged material will determine how much time can be spent in 

preparation for freezing. At the very least, bound volumes should be wrapped 

with a single fold of freezer paper, or silicone paper, if it is likely that 

their covers will stick together during the freezing process.
All rare, intrinsically valuable and delicate material should be prepared for 

freezing separately from other materials and also in separate categories so that 

each can be located and identified before they are dried. Each category may 

require a different type of drying than used for the other less sensitive 

materials. For instance, early printed books and manuscripts are made up of a 

variety of material including vellum, leather, paper, wood metal, ivory, inks 

and water color media. Others will be delicate and or highly water sensitive. 

These will need to be dried very carefully and if freeze-drying is used it 

should be undertaken with the minimum amount of internal chamber heating. If 

only a few items are involved it may be preferable to send them directly to a 

certified conservator for immediate treatment.
CONTAINERS AND METHODS OF PACKING FOR FREEZING
The choice of packing containers should be carefully considered. Although 

corrugated board boxes are cheaper to purchase, locate and store on site than 

plastic type milk crates, they may restrict the rate and efficiency of drying 

and also be prone to collapse when filled with wet material. If it is possible 

to decide in advance what method of drying is to be used, be guided by the 

technical requirements of the vendorþs drying system. For instance, if 

freeze-drying is to be used, one cubic foot plastic milk crates might be 

preferred, since these provide open spaces within the interlocking crates to aid 

in the efficient out-gassing of ice by sublimation.
With some forms of vacuum drying where sublimation does not occur, corrugated 

boxes may be quite suitable, depending on the location of the heat source in the 

chamber. In either case, containers should not be larger than approximately one 

cubic foot, to avoid excessive weight, a vital consideration for workers 

removing material from site and also to help reduce damage from collapsing 

boxes. Usually boxes will be prepared for freezing on pallets and this is where 

the weight of heavy wet boxes can collapse and cause additional damage to 

material within the pile. To avoid this, use plastic milk crates or very sturdy 

corrugated boxes for the wettest material and re-box file records if their 

original boxes are saturated with water. Endeavor to use one size and type of 

box. If this not possible, do not mix sizes when packing on pallets. The number 

of boxes per pallet should be no more than can be supported without collapse.
Although faster freezing and drying will result if boxes are not packed 

tightly, the contents will distort during the drying operation. To achieve the 

best drying results for books, they should be packed closely together so that 

drying is done under some restraining pressure. A book should never be packed 

foredge down as the weight of the text block will cause an inversion of its 

natural round shape. Pack books spine-down or flat and avoid placing larger 

volumes on top of smaller ones to avoid sagging which will be costly to correct 

during restoration.
The decisions taken at this stage will greatly affect the outcome and costs 

of the processes used for cold storage, drying and restoration. It has, 

unfortunately, not been sufficiently appreciated in the past that care in 

packing at this stage will significantly reduce post-recovery costs.
High costs certainly occur if boxes are stacked on pallets in mixed sizes 

which will increase the potential for collapse under the weight of water, 

crushing and damaging the material in the process.
It should be possible to move the wet materials directly from library to 

freezing facility, preferably in refrigerated trucks which can be drawn up to 

the loading site. For small collections of books and documents, dry ice may be 

used to freeze the material for transport in un-refrigerated trucks to long-term 

freezing facilities. (Gloves should be worn at all times when handling dry ice).
Disaster Preparedness Table of 

Contents
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272