SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/research/hire-help/researcher-opportunity.html

Any individual who is performing research activities at facilities of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) on behalf of others, usually for appropriate compensation, may be eligible for inclusion on our
online listing of independent researchers
. This is a new customer service initiative spurred by the numerous requests for such an offering.
What is the online listing?
The listing identifies independent researchers who may be willing to undertake research in our records holdings for individuals or organizations who are unable to visit our facilities themselves or who may want some preliminary research carried out prior to their own visit. We also offer the listings, without endorsement, as a service to our customers.
Who qualifies for inclusion on the listing?
Self-employed individuals and companies or organizations who research our records holdings on behalf of others. NARA employees do not qualify.
How will the listing be used?
We will post the information on our web site and in our facilities nationwide, and share printed copies, on request, with researchers who cannot travel to our facilities to conduct their own research.
How do I get on the list?
With access to a printer and the Adobe Acrobat Reader software available below, you may download and print a copy of NA Form 14115, National Archives and Records Administration Independent Researcher Listing Application Form ,
For Use by Regional Records Services and Washington, DC area facilities
The form is a total of two pages and is available in PDF and Word formats. It is formatted for letter size paper (8.5" x 11"). If your printer cannot accommodate this size, select "shrink to fit" when the "Print" dialog box appears. If you need more space for any field, you may attach a separate sheet.
If you don’t have access to a printer, or are unable to download, you may still obtain a copy of the form by contacting us:
Be sure to indicate the manner in which you want the form returned to you and provide the appropriate return address.
Please note that all fields noted as "required" on the form must be completed for inclusion on the listing.
Complete the form and send it by postal mail or fax to:
National Archives and Records Administration
National Archives and Records Administration
College Park, MD 20740
If I do not wish to be included in the listing, will this inhibit my access to NARA records and facilities?
Completion of the form by independent researchers is strictly voluntary. Failure to complete and return the form will in no way inhibit your access to NARA’s holdings.
Is there a fee involved?
When should I update the information provided?
Whenever any of the information that you previously submitted about your services has changed. We will update the listing as soon as possible.
How do I update my listing?
Submit a new copy of the form, marked "update" in the appropriate box, to the address shown above.
What if I decide that I no longer wish to be included in the listing?
To be removed from the listing, direct a fax or postal request to the address shown above or send an email to
Are there other circumstances that may trigger my removal from the listing?
All independent researchers using NARA facilities are expected to comply with our established research room procedures. Those found to be in violation of such procedures may be stricken from the listing. Complaints received on a regular basis regarding the business practices of any independent researcher may also be grounds for exclusion from the listing.
Should I view this listing as an endorsement by NARA of my work?
No. Inclusion on the list may not be viewed or advertised as an endorsement by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). The listing is compiled and disseminated as a service to the public.
Who may I contact for further information about the listing process?
For further information, contact the Archives Library Information Center noted above by:
This page was last reviewed on April 22, 2022.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272