SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/education/distance-learning/professional-development

Visit the National Archives from home! Our interactive webinars for educators feature historical documents, images, maps, posters, and other primary sources — as well as resources and strategies for bringing primary sources into your classroom. All webinars are free of charge.
Advance registration required.
Questions? Please contact us at
distancelearning@nara.gov
Live captioning is available by request. Please include a request for live captioning services in your registration for the event and submit your registration at least two weeks in advance of the webinar.
Free, regularly scheduled professional development workshops for educators explore how to use primary sources to delve into the big ideas of the founding documents of the United States. During each interactive program, participants will engage with primary sources and partake in collaborative group work and discussion to discover how to use National Archives resources and programs to teach civic knowledge and skills.
distancelearning@nara.gov
to request your program.
Connect your school or district with the National Archives for one of our by-request professional development webinars!
, the online tool for teaching with documents from the National Archives. Learn how to find primary sources for teaching history and civics topics. Explore the 12 different document-based activity tools and find out how, with a free DocsTeach account, you can create your own activities or modify existing activities to share with your students online. Already familiar with DocsTeach? Request an in-depth training on creating activities or finding DocsTeach resources for teaching a particular topic.
Join the National Archives for a hands-on session and discover resources for teaching the founding documents of the United States. Discover a model you can use to introduce your students to these documents, take a look at the Declaration of Independence through different lenses, and access primary sources that can help students connect the big ideas of the Constitution and Bill of Rights to their own lives.
Join this interactive virtual program to discover how political cartoons can engage students in today's elections by introducing the process and issues using historical primary sources. Practice techniques for analyzing political cartoons in the classroom and learn about additional resources from the National Archives.
Find high-quality online sources for National History Day and tips for how to access them. Schedule a free webinar – customizable by location and grade level – for NHD educators anytime of the year.
Our self-serve mini-webinars cover
basics and tips for online teaching. Each webinar is approximately 20 minutes.
Our previously recorded webinars feature primary sources and teaching strategies. Access our full Professional Development for Educators playlist on
Learn about resources for projects and primary source research from the National Archives and our partner organizations, the theme and categories, using primary and secondary sources effectively, and teaching tools for NHD.
This page was last reviewed on May 29, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272