SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/exhibits/influenza-epidemic/records-list.html

Letter carriers, mass transit workers, and others who came in contact with the public, were especially vulnerable to disease. Wearing a face mask helped them avoid contagion.
National Archives at College Park, MD.
Record number 165-WW-269B-15.
The flu spread rapidly in institutional settings, including military barracks where men shared close quarters. This notification of the death of an army private is one of thousands sent from military bases to families and other government officials.
National Archives at Chicago.
Dr. D. A. Richardson, a physician visiting a New Mexico pueblo, describes the symptoms and course of treatment for flu victims. The disease progressed erratically. Some patients recovered, having followed the doctor's orders to remain prostrate and have liquids only. Others deteriorated rapidly, contracting pneumonia and dying within days.
National Archives at Denver.
Officials feared mass hysteria in major cities. Citizens were urged to stay indoors and avoid congested areas. Here, policemen patrol the streets to ensure public safety.
National Archives at College Park, MD.
Record number 165-WW-269B-25.
The flu interrupted the activities of the U.S. Food Administration responsible for rationing during World War I. The Administration's Wilburton, Oklahoma, office cancelled its public meeting because of 300 reported cases of flu in the area.
National Archives at Fort Worth.
In this letter, a volunteer nurse assigned to various military bases, writes to friend about her experiences. Her initial reaction to death is a window into a personal experience, rather than an official report: "the first one [officer] that died sure unnerved me-I had to go to the nurses' quarters and cry it out."
National Archives at Kansas City.
In October of 1918, Congress approved a $1 million budget for the U. S. Public Health Service to recruit 1000 medical doctors and over 700 registered nurses. Nurses were scarce, as their proximity to and interaction with the disease increased the risk of death.
National Archives at College Park, MD.
Record number 165-WW-269B-5.
The flu spread rapidly in institutional settings, including government operated Indian schools. This notification of a student's pneumonia following influenza is one of thousands sent from Indian schools to next-of-kin.
National Archives at Riverside.
The Navy Department tried to prevent the spread of the influenza by educating sailors about protecting themselves. In Circular No. 1, the Navy's Bureau of Sanitation suggests fresh air, adequate sleep, and fluids to stay healthy.
National Archives at New York City.
Because of the Federal government's role in administering Indian reservations, the effect of the flu on Indian populations is well documented. At the Reno (Nevada) Agency, an agent took photographs and compiled detailed notes: "In this shack I found four people laying on the dirt floor wrapped in rags apparently all suffering from influenza."
National Archives at San Francisco.
The flu was highly contagious and spread rapidly, as documented in a military report notifying the Office Quartermaster General in Washington D.C., of a staffing crisis. The report notes 11 officers and 1,489 employees "absent today," with the situation not improving.
National Archives at Philadelphia.
Because of the Federal government's role in administering Indian reservations, the effect of the flu on Indian populations is well documented. Residents of Western Shoshone (Nevada) Agency received a notice of rules, such as keeping the home aired out, and women and children were to stay home, which they were to follow for the duration of the epidemic.
National Archives at San Francisco.
The flu prevented day-to-day operations from going smoothly. Officials advised all persons to wear face masks, even indoors. Many believed that a person could contract the disease by handling documents and equipment.
National Archives at College Park, MD.
Record number 165-WW-269B-16.
Because of the Federal government's role in administering Indian reservations, the effect of the flu on Indian populations is well documented. This notification sent to the parents of a student at an Indian boarding school is typical of many letters on file.
National Archives at Seattle.
Hospital staff hand wrote admissions daily to South Beach Hospital. The journal notes that six people were admitted on Christmas Day and that John N. Friel was admitted on December 27, 1918 at 5 pm and died on January 2, 1919 at 1:25 a.m.
National Archives at Seattle.
Mass transit systems, with crowds of people in close quarters, were fertile venues for the spread of disease. In Seattle, public health officials required passengers and employees wear masks as a precautionary measure.
National Archives at College Park, MD.
Record number 165-WW-269B-11.
1918 Influenza Epidemic Home