SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/storage/glass-plate-negatives.html

Housing Glass Plate Negatives at the National Archives and Records Administration
Glass Plate Handling Procedures
Intact glass plates with flaking emulsion
The extent of flaking, use, and value of the glass plate will dictate the housing option chosen for plates with flaking emulsion.
a few small edge losses, and glass chipping at the edges where the emulsion appears stable and secure at the loss site ( no lifting at the edges of the loss, no flaps of emulsion).
NARA practice is to house such plates in sleeves, as described above, with added handling note: Flaking edges, remove/insert into envelope with care.
Continue as described above.
flaking edges with hanging flaps which could be torn off; cracking overall with blind cleavage at the interior (looking like a dry mudflat).
Duplicate flaking plates, and avoid handling the original plates after duplication. House these plates in four-flap enclosures, and store them vertically as described above. Very high value plates with extensive flaking/cleavage should be sink-matted and stored flat. In either case, add a handling note: Flaking glass plate: handle with extreme caution. Use duplicate copy.
Sandwich the broken pieces between two sheets of buffered board.
Place the sandwich into a four-flap enclosure.
Several sandwiches can be stacked flat no more than 5 deep in a shallow box labeled BROKEN GLASS-STORE AND CARRY HORIZONTALLY, and store flat.
The paper stock used in the enclosures and storage boxes should be of high quality, lignin-free, sulfur-free, alum-free, pH 7-8.5 paper which meets the requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) IT 9.2 
Photographic Enclosures (now ISO 18902) which includes the Photographic Activity Test. ANSI IT9.17 Photographic Plate-Storage (ISO 3897) provides recommendations on the storage of glass plates.
NARA recommends buffered paper stock for the storage of all photographic materials. The degradation of all paper products over time means that the use of non-buffered, neutral paper stock results in short order in an acidic folder that becomes increasingly acidic. Recent research has shown that the only hazard to alkaline-sensitive photographs is in the event of prolonged exposure to water. Since buffered paper has been shown over time to drop in pH, this is only an issue for the first 10 years or so of the package's lifetime, after which the enclosure is neutral pH or slightly acidic.
How do I move glass plate negatives?
for guidance on moving glass plate negatives.
[note]: Rev 6/18/01, Sarah S. Wagner, Senior Photograph Conservator and Miranda Martin, National Preservation Program Officer, Preservation Programs, National Archives and Records Administration
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272