SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/research/census/1935-business-roll-lists

This page provides roll lists for each of the six
1935 Census of Business
microfilm publications:
For information on how to purchase individual rolls of microfilm, see
How to Order Microfilm
. To learn which NARA facilities have this microfilm available for public use, search our online
1935 Census of Business: Schedules of Advertising Agencies
1935 Census of Business: Schedules of Banking and Financial Institutions
1935 Census of Business: Schedules of Miscellaneous Enterprises
. The records are arranged alphabetically by state, then by county, and then by political subdivision. There are five exceptions to this arrangement: (1) Los Angeles Co., CA, follows Yuba Co., CA; (2) Cook Co., IL, follows Woodford Co., IL; (3) Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond Cos., NY, follow Yates Co., NY; (4) Philadelphia Co., PA, follows York Co., PA; and (5) the independent cities of Virginia follow York Co., VA.
1935 Census of Business: Schedules of Motor Trucking for Hire
. The records are arranged alphabetically by state, then by county, and then by political subdivision. There are five exceptions to this arrangement: (1) Los Angeles Co., CA, follows Yuba Co., CA; (2) Cook Co., IL, follows Woodford Co., IL; (3) Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond Cos., NY, follow Yates Co., NY; (4) Philadelphia Co., PA follows York Co., PA; and (5) the independent cities of Virginia follow York Co., VA. The independent cities are listed in the Table of Contents.
In addition, schedules that (apparently) were "missed" during the initial arrangement of a state's schedules are filmed at the end of the state, except that the additional California schedules are filmed before Los Angeles Co.; additional Illinois schedules are filmed before Cook Co.; additional New York State schedules are filmed before Bronx Co.; additional Pennsylvania schedules are filmed before Philadelphia Co. Additional schedules for Los Angeles, Cook, Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, Richmond, and Philadelphia Cos. are filmed at the end of the appropriate county. Supplemental schedules for Virginia are filmed following the independent cities, arranged alphabetically by county, then alphabetically by independent city. The Table of Contents only refers to "supplemental schedules" when these begin or end the roll. There may be one or more series of supplemental schedules for each state, they are each arranged alphabetically by county. At least one roll begins with a short "retakes" section which consists of retakes of images that were blurry or otherwise improperly filmed during the original filming. The Table of Contents does not note which rolls begin with retakes as a "retakes" target sheet clearly marks the beginning of these rolls.
1935 Census of Business: Schedules of Public Warehousing
. The records are arranged alphabetically by state, then by county, and then by political subdivision.
1935 Census of Business: Schedules of Radio Broadcasting Stations
. The records are arranged alphabetically by state, then by county, then by station wattage, and then alphabetically by station call letters. Entire U.S.
This page was last reviewed on February 27, 2020.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272