SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/education/distance-learning/middle-high.html

Visit the National Archives without leaving your classroom! Our free, interactive programs feature primary sources from our holdings. Each program aligns with National Social Studies Standards  and Common Core State Standards. We also provide teacher guides with pre- and post-program lessons.
We can deliver up to two distance learning sessions per school per day. For schools requesting more than two sessions, we recommend connecting two classes at the same time or scheduling programs over multiple days.
Technology Requirements
You can connect your class via traditional videoconferencing equipment or online via a computer with a webcam, microphone, and speakers. These programs can also accommodate students connecting from home.
distancelearning@nara.gov
with questions or to request your program today!
The Charters of Freedom: Declaration of Independence, Constitution, and Bill of Rights
Students will analyze opening passages of the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights. They will create a graphic organizer to help them distinguish the founding documents by their purpose. Next, students will match document excerpts to each excerpt’s origin – the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, or the Bill of Rights. The program will conclude with a discussion about the legacy of these founding documents.
Woman Suffrage Parade in Washington, DC, 3/3/1913
Using the founding documents of the United States and records of the National Archives, students will determine how and why women fought for the right to vote. Students will explore the challenges suffragists faced and discover why the fight for women’s voting rights persisted even after the ratification of the 19th Amendment.
The first printed version of the Declaration of Independence
Students will explore the Declaration of Independence as an artifact, a primary source, and a persuasive text. Students explore the document's important sections, and evaluate the persuasive elements of the Declaration.
This program is offered as a part of
, an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
Voter Registration Drive at the Black Expo in Chicago, 9/1973
Using the Constitution, constitutional amendments, and legislation, students will explore the progression of voting rights in the United States and its impact on representative government. Additional primary source documents from the National Archives, including photographs and political cartoons, will enhance student understanding of the ways in which contemporary events and public civic engagement influence their lives today.
This program is offered as a part of
, an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
This Is the Team That Will Win Every Time, 3/27/1898
Students will analyze primary sources to examine the powers of the Federal Government and discover how the Constitution created a stronger central government compared to the Articles of Confederation. They will also discover how the Constitution checks and balances power between the three branches of government and between the Federal Government and state governments.
Photograph of Leaders at the Head of the Civil Rights March on Washington, D.C., 8/28/1963
Students will focus on the rights and limitations within the Bill of Rights. They will identify Bill of Rights issues using historical scenarios from the holdings of the National Archives and learn why it is important for citizens to know their rights.
This program is offered as a part of
, an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
is an education initiative from the National Archives that promotes civic literacy and engagement.
Learn more about our regularly scheduled webinars and by-request programs
This page was last reviewed on February 25, 2026.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272