SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/global-pages/accessibility

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
Social Media Policies
All National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) museums, research facilities, and Presidential Libraries are accessible and
with the ADA. For questions regarding a specific location’s accessibility, please contact the
Section 508 & Architectural Barriers Notice of Rights
- Notice of Rights Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. § 794d and the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. §§ 4151--57).
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is committed to making its electronic and information technologies accessible to the widest possible audience, including individuals with disabilities. NARA regularly monitors its sites to ensure that they meet and exceed the requirements of
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act (29 U.S.C. 794d
), as amended in 1998, and the
W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
NARA's Federal Section 508 Program Manager is the primary point of contact for NARA's efforts to provide individuals with disabilities with equal access to electronic information and data. These efforts pertain to
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1998
If the format of any material on our website interferes with your ability to access the information, contact us at the address above.
To allow us to respond in a manner most helpful to you, please let us know:
Documents on our website are in many formats. The primary file types we use are.
In general, we use Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). When creating HTML documents, we adhere to Section 508 standards; for example, we include alternate text to describe graphics.
Our website also features documents in Adobe Portable Document Format ® (PDF). Most PDF files are accessible to those who use assistive technology such as screen readers. Some PDF files created by legacy systems or software may not be accessible.
If you are having trouble reading any PDF file, please
reach out to us for assistance
, and we will send you an alternate version.
For detailed, up-to-date information about Acrobat Reader or the PDF format, visit
You can open files in Microsoft PowerPoint® (PPT) format if you have any version of PowerPoint installed on your computer.
You can view files in Microsoft Word® (DOC) format if you have Word version 6.0 or higher installed on your computer. Word documents can also be viewed with many other word-processing software programs.
Section 508 is a federal law that mandates agencies to ensure individuals with disabilities have equal access to electronic information and data, comparable to individuals without disabilities, unless doing so would impose an undue burden on the agency. The Section 508 standards outline the technical requirements and criteria used to evaluate compliance with this law. For more information on Section 508 and the associated technical standards, you can visit the following websites:
This page was last reviewed on March 12, 2026.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272