SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/storage/cold-storage-photos.html

This guide should be followed when storing, handling, and accessing photographs and films placed into cold storage environments. Cold storage may be humidity controlled cold storage vaults, with or without an acclimation room, or non-humidity controlled vaults, refrigerators and freezers. Cold storage is defined in
NARA 1571, Archival Storage Standards
Cold storage is one of the best ways to slow deterioration of photographs, especially film-based photographs (negatives and positives). However, care must be taken to keep condensation from forming on items that are retrieved  from the cold and moved to a warmer environment such as a research room or designated holding area.
Depending on the type of storage vault or refrigerator, you should have the following supplies on hand:
Some cold vaults have an adjacent acclimation room  with a temperature and relative humidity that is between the cold vault setpoints and the research room or designated holding area setpoints. This means that bags are not needed in order to remove items from the cold vault as long as the following steps are followed:
Always use the acclimation room when entering and exiting a vault to minimize the influx of warm air and the resulting climate fluctuations in the vault. Open the outside acclimation room door and shut it completely before opening the vault door.
The acclimation room climate is set at a temperature and relative humidity specific to the climate of the cold storage vault so that no moisture condensation will occur on materials when:
In some cases, photographs may be routinely bagged for cold storage as insurance against failure of the vault to retain the set temperature and relative humidity. Examples of possible failure include long-term power outages, a loss in climate control in which the temperature and/or relative humidity rises rapidly, frost accumulation, or water release. Bagging for storage is a wise precaution if the vault is unreliable in terms of climate control, where there are no backup power units or redundant climate control systems, or for extremely valuable photographs where any potential risk is considered unacceptable.
Records taken offsite should be placed in an insulated container, such as a small picnic cooler or chest, during transit. Insulated containers are available in a wide range of sizes from beverage size to several cubic feet in capacity. Insulated containers will prevent records being exposed to extreme weather conditions which could accelerate deterioration.
Records which were offsite should be allowed to acclimate to in-house office conditions before they are refiled to cold storage. This acclimation period should be either several days for single items or a week for boxes. This procedure is especially important where records might have been exposed to higher humidity levels at the offsite location.
This page was last reviewed on February 14, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272