SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/isoo/oversight-groups/sltps-pac

Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO)
The State, Local, Tribal and Private Sector Policy Advisory Committee (SLTPS-PAC) will advise the President, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO), and other executive branch officials on all matters concerning the oversight of the SLTPS Program.
Created on August 18, 2010, by the President under
Executive Order 13549
, "Classified National Security Information Program for State, Local, Tribal, and Private Sector Entities" (
To discuss program-related policy issues and advises on all matters concerning the policies relating to access and safeguarding of classified national security information by U.S. State, Local, Tribal, and Private Sector Entities, as specified in Executive Order 13549 and its implementing directive.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security, in coordination with federal, state, and local partners, release the
National Network of Fusion Centers Reports
. These reports summarize and characterize the overall capabilities and performance of the National Network based on the results of yearly assessments.
The Department of Homeland Security Fusion Center Engagement and Information Sharing Strategy for 2022–2026
. This outlines a multi-year commitment to supporting our law enforcement and homeland security partners in states and cities nationwide, and describes how DHS enables information sharing vital to fusion centers’ missions and our national security
The 2021 National Network of Fusion Centers Final Report
summarizes the findings on the capabilities and performance of the National Network of Fusion Centers between October 1, 2020, and September 30, 2021.
[also available: 2018, 2019, 2020-
visit DHS Fusion Center Reports
The House Homeland Security Committee released in November 2017, the
Majority Staff Report "Advancing the homeland security information sharing environment: A review of the National Network of Fusion Centers"
The U.S. House of Representatives Subcommittee on Counter-terrorism and Intelligence released in July 2013, the
Majority Staff Report on the National Network of Fusion Centers
- Changes to the Central Verification System in support of Executive Order 13549- January 31, 2014.
This Notice outlines new data fields relevant to security clearances for all SLTPS personnel.
This page was last reviewed on September 18, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272