SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/seattle

National Archives at Seattle
We maintain and provide access to permanent records created by federal agencies and courts in the following states:
6125 Sand Point Way NE
The research room at the National Archives at Seattle is open by appointment only, Monday–Friday, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m.
seattle.archives@nara.gov
or call 206-336-5132 for a virtual consultation appointment prior to requesting a research visit.
frequently asked questions
for further information about conducting in-person research at the National Archives.
6125 Sand Point Way NE
Seattle, Washington 98115-7999
*Our telephones at this facility have been experiencing intermittent service disruptions. If you are unable to reach us via telephone, please email us at
seattle.archives@nara.gov
seattle.archives@nara.gov
Parking is available onsite, please park streetside, facing Sand Point Way.
Find links to finding aids, ordering information, online research tools, and much more.
Find more information on the work we are doing to digitize the records that were relocated to Seattle following the closure of the NARA Anchorage facility in 2014.
Find phone numbers and email addresses for key staff and departments at our facility and
Frequently Asked Questions.
Digitizing the records from the former Alaska region is a top priority of the National Archives. In order to maximize available resources in terms of staff and equipment, the records are being temporarily moved to the National Archives at College Park. Approximately 3,600 cubic feet of records will move in FY 2021 in three shipments:
In FY 2023, another shipment of records was sent to the National Archives at College Park. Approximately 1,200 cubic feet of records was sent in this fourth shipment.
During the time the records are located in College Park, reference service may be interrupted. Due to COVID-19, no in-person research is currently available. However, every effort will be made to fulfill reference requests. Limited reference services for affected records will resume October 1, 2021, except for emergency requests (e.g., requests involving rights and interests, looming court dates, or significant congressional matters), which will be addressed as they are received. The records will be returned to the National Archives at Seattle for long-term storage and in-person access after digitization.
You may send reference inquiries regarding the affected records by email to
seattle.archives@nara.gov
or by postal mail to 6125 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, Washington 98115-7999.
Progress on the project can be tracked
, and answers to Frequently Asked Questions are available
As of August 28, 2018, all district court records from Montana previously held at the National Archives at Seattle have been moved to the National Archives at Denver.  The National Archives at Seattle has district court records from Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington only.  For questions concerning the district court records from Montana, please email the National Archives at Denver at
denver.archives@nara.gov
.  For more information on the National Archives at Denver,
Vegetables grown by George Haley, a resident of the Pribilof Islands (AK) [Contained within
Pribilof Islands Glass Plate Negatives, 1913-1921 (NAID: 2555605
If you're doing genealogical research, and you've hit a brick wall in your research, these workshops are for you. On the second Thursday of every month, our genealogy experts are available from 11:30 am to 1 pm to offer assistance and advice on how to get you over your wall.
This page was last reviewed on September 6, 2024.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272