SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/conservation/library-materials-08.html

VACUUM AND FREEZE DRYING TECHNOLOGIES
It is important to understand that the processes used by vacuum and 

freeze-drying companies differ considerably depending on the specific 

requirements of the material to be dried. The majority of these companies have 

developed their technologies for food. Few have had experience in drying paper 

and books and therefore may not know if their normal operating system would be 

safe, or cost effective for this purpose. Freeze-drying has a number of 

significant advantages over vacuum drying since water remains in the frozen 

state during sublimation, a process which removes water from the solid state to 

the gaseous state. This avoids most of the problems associated with expansion, 

sticking and wicking of water sensitive and soluble media. Vacuum drying, 

generally considered to be a process that changes a liquid to a vapor, will 

result in a much greater risk of expansion, distortion, sticking, and staining.
Although both drying methods have been found to produce satisfactory results 

in a number of disaster recovery events, comparison between the two following a 

disaster has not been made. Our preference is for freeze-drying because it is 

the least aggressive of the two methods. However, there are situations where for 

instance, archival documents have been affected and where there is a low 

percentage of intrinsically valuable material, where vacuum drying has provided 

satisfactory results. The choice between the two should be governed by the 

nature, value and condition of the damaged material. Rare collections of 

significant value need to be dried with due regard to the sensitivity of the 

substrate and media and it is for this reason why we suggested earlier that such 

materials be segregated form the less rare.
Freeze-drying which is used to dry animal specimens, does so at very low 

internal chamber temperatures, lower than is used for most food processes. One 

animal specimen may take several weeks to dry. At this slow rate of drying the 

costs are high. Most paper and book material can withstand higher temperatures 

than those used to dry delicate animal specimens and there is a need for thermal 

energy to make the process efficient and cost effective.
If a vacuum or freeze-drying chamber is designed to operate with internal 

chamber heat sources, these must not touch the material to be dried, to avoid 

over heating and scorching. The internal temperature of a chamber should be no 

greater than 100 degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius). For sensitive 

materials, including early book material where there is a mix of paper, vellum 

leather and wood etc., below ambient temperatures or those used to dry animal 

specimens should be used, to dry the material slowly and under carefully 

monitored conditions. (Note: In specifying an upper limit of 100 degrees 

Fahrenheit we consider this to be a safe temperature. There is insufficient data 

at this time to evaluate the effects of higher temperatures).
It is important to realize that the success of any large drying system 

depends on the ability of the system to stop the develop- ment of mold during 

and after the drying process. Be aware of the risks in accepting material 

returned from commercial drying processes unless there is a guarantee that none 

will be returned damp or wet. If mold develops after return, it may not be 

possible to detect it, if the material remains boxed. If care was taken to 

segregate mold-contaminated from non-contaminated items during recovery, boxing 

and freezing, this will help determine if the drying was carried out properly. 

If mold develops in the non-contaminated material, the chances are that either 

the drying was not done correctly or that drying was not complete.
Mold-infected material, if dried completely under freeze-drying conditions, 

can be safely controlled for a short period of time, so that the spores remain 

quite dormant if stored after drying in an air conditioned environment 

maintained at 50 to 55 degrees Fahrenheit and a relative humidity of 35 percent 

or lower. However they must not be returned to the library or archive shelves 

until the mold contamination has been treated. For this reason we recommend that 

at the end of the drying cycle and while still in the drying chamber all 

mold-contaminated material be sterilized. If extreme care was not taken to 

separate contaminated from non-contaminated materials before the drying 

operation, we recommend that each drying load be sterilized.
REHABILITATION AFTER DRYING
If maximum benefits are to be gained from stabilization by freezing, every 

effort should be made, first, to identify and assess the value, condition, and 

total numbers and types of materials damaged, and second, to draw up 

comprehensive lists of those materials which can be replaced and those which 

should be reclaimed and restored. Replacement is nearly always cheaper than 

restoration. Volumes to be reclaimed will need to be evaluated in terms of the 

amount of restoration needed and probable costs. The best time to make such 

judgments, if a disaster preparedness plan does not exist, is after the volumes 

have been dried and before they are returned to the library or archive shelves.
The following represent basic steps that need to be taken after drying in 

order to begin returning the material to normal housing environments.
Unless a drying company can guarantee in writing that no material will be 

returned boxed if it has a water content exceeding 7% by weight, there is a high 

possibility that some boxes will contain damp material that will add to the 

risks of post drying mold development, and which, if allowed to develop, will 

quickly spread to other uncontaminated material, if left unchecked and therefore 

undetected.
It is important when preparing specification for a drying contract that 

acceptable water content is not specified as an average of a books total water 

content. For instance the text block of a book may be measured at far less than 

7% but the water content of the book cover boards may contain higher 7% of 

water. Therefore it is necessary to specify that the waters content of all the 

books composite materials be less than 7%.
Do not store the material in un-opened boxes immediately upon return from the 

drying facilities, even if this seems to be the most convenient action to take.
All books and paper file records should be unboxed and placed on open 

shelving in a well ventilated, air-conditioned rehabilitation area, well 

separated from the main collections. The rehabilitation area makes it easier to 

assess the condition of the dried materials, as well as to identify those that 

can be replaced and those that must be cleaned and restored.
A carefully organized, random inspection of mold- infected materials should 

be conducted daily by personnel trained to carry out this important task.
Whether materials have or have not been sterilized during the drying process, 

it is necessary to monitor their behavior as a check against the effectiveness 

of drying and sterilization and to identify any potential for mold growth and to 

take the appropriate action, before the return of these materials to the main 

collections.
We are concerned here with monitoring the dried volumes while they are in the 

rehabilitation area, and after their return to the main stacks. This monitoring 

should be continued at regular intervals for at least a year after they are 

returned to the main library shelving.
In preparing the rehabilitation area, provide about twice the number of 

shelves as would be needed for normal book requirements. This will compensate 

for the effects of distorted and expanded books and provide sufficient air space 

to allow the material to regain their moisture equilibrium content which, 

depending upon circumstances, may take a week or two.
Theoretically, equilibrium moisture regain can be accomplished at the end of 

a drying run while the material is contained in the drying chamber. The chamber 

can be back filled with moisture to achieve the desired result. However this is 

only possible and safe if the drying method has been guaranteed to dry the 

material completely. If there remains some partially damp material at the end of 

a drying run, back filling the chamber with moisture would make such material 

more vulnerable to mold growth.
The rehabilitation area should be maintained at a relative humidity of 30 to 

40 percent and a temperature of less than 65ø Fahrenheit. Both humidity and 

temperature controls must be adjustable.
It is desirable to maintain the collection in the rehabilitation area for a 

period of at least six months. At this time, temperature and humidity in the 

rehabilitation area can be gradually changed to duplicate conditions in the 

stack areas to which they will be returned. At the end of this time, if no mold 

growth has occurred, the volumes can be returned to the main stacks and 

monitored as indicated above. It is highly desirable but usually not practical 

to leave volumes in the rehabilitation area for an added six months in an 

environment that duplicates normal stack conditions, as a check against post 

drying mold growth.
No materials should be returned to the main library shelves without very 

careful inspection, and preferably not before all necessary cleaning and 

restoration has been completed.
Disaster Preparedness Table of 

Contents
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272