SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/publications/microfilm-catalogs/biographical/part-01.html

The National Archives Microfilm Publication Program
Types of Microfilm Publications
Catalogs of Microfilm Publications
Microfilm Specifications
Records of the Bureau of Land Management, Record Group 49
Military Bounty Land Warrants
Private Land Claims Files
Records of District Courts of the United States, Record Group 21
Court Cases Relating to Private Land Claims
Records of the Veterans Administration, Record Group 15
Bounty Land Warrant Application Files
Civilian Government Employees
General Records of the Department of State, Record Group 59
Applications and Recommendations
Other State Department Records Relating to Appointments
General Records of the Department of Justice, Record Group 60
Records Relating to the Apointment of Federal Judges, Attorneys, and Marshals
Records of the Office of the Secretary of the Interior, Record Group 48
Records of the Post Office Department, Record Group 28
"Old Loan" and Tax Records
Records of the Bureau of the Public Debt, Record Group 53
Continental Loan Office Records
Other "Old Loan" Records
Records of the Internal Revenue Service, Record Group 58
Internal Revenue Assessment Lists, 1826-1874
(Alabama-North Carolina)
"Old Loan" and Tax Records (cont.)
Records of the Internal Revenue Service, Record Group 58 (cont.)
Internal Revenue Assessment Lists, 1826-1874 (cont.)
(Pennsylvania-West Virginia)
Records of the Accounting Officers of the Department of the Treasury, Record 
 Group 217
War Department Collection of Confederate Records, Record Group 109
Southern Civilians (cont.)
Records of the Adjutant General's Office, 1780's-1917, Record Group 94
Records of District Courts of the United States, Record Group 21
General Records of the Department of the Treasury, Record Group 56
Records of the Office of the Quartermaster General, Record Group 92
District of Columbia Residents
Records of the Government of the District of Columbia, Record Group 351
Records of District Courts of the United States, Record Group 21
Records of the Accounting Officers of the Department of the Treasury, Record 
 Group 217
Records of the Spanish Governors of Puerto Rico, Record Group 186
Amnesties and Pardons
Records of the Adjutant General's Office, 1780's-1917, Record Group 94
General Records of the Department of State, Record Group 59
Records of District Courts of the United States, Record Group 21
Aliens Residing in the United States
General Records of the Department of State, Record Group 59
Records of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, Record Group 85
Records of the Supreme Court of the United States, Record Group 267
The National Archives and Records Administration is responsible for administering 
 the permanently valuable, noncurrent records of the federal government. The 
 holdings of the National Archives now amount to more than 1.7 million cubic 
 feet. They date from the First Continental Congress and consist of the basic 
 records of the legislative, judicial, and executive branches of government. 
 The Presidential libraries of Herbert Hoover, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. 
 Truman, Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Gerald R. 
 Ford, Jimmy Carter, and Ronald Reagan and the Presidential projects of Richard 
 M. Nixon and George Bush contain the papers of those Presidents and many of 
 their associates in office. These research resources document significant events 
 in our nation's history, but most of them are preserved for continuing practical 
 use in the ordinary processes of government; for the protection of individual 
 rights; and for the research use of scholars, students, and other individual 
 researchers.
This catalog lists records published on microfilm by the National Archives 
 and Records Administration (NARA) that are useful for genealogical and biographical 
 research. Extensive searches were made of available microfilm publications to 
 select those that contain the most valuable information about individuals. The 
 records described here include such standard genealogical records as Revolutionary 
 War pensions and bounty land warrants. Most of this catalog, however, details 
 less well-known sources, such as land records, civilian government employees' 
 records, and amnesties and pardons. Other microfilm records commonly used for 
 genealogical research are described in the companion catalogs listed below.
The publications described in this catalog are arranged by topic. For each 
 publication, a brief description of the records and the type of information 
 they contain is provided. The contents of each roll of film are listed; however, 
 where the publication titles are self-explanatory and the publication consists 
 of a single roll, the description and roll listing may have been omitted. For 
 a few microfilm publications containing many rolls, only those rolls identified 
 as containing information of a biographical or genealogical nature are listed.
Researchers should also be aware that three important limitations face genealogists 
 doing research at the National Archives. First, the colonial period is not documented; 
 few records predate the Revolutionary War. Also, in the 19th century, the government 
 did not touch the lives of individual Americans to the extent that it does today.
The second limitation arises from the nature of archives. Records are arranged 
 to reflect their original purpose, usually just as they were kept by the agency 
 that created them. It is not possible to rearrange them in ways that might be 
 more helpful to genealogists.
Third, NARA keeps only federal records. Births, marriages, and deaths have 
 not been primary concerns of the federal government. These records are best 
 found in family, local, and state records.
The records listed in this catalog are from the following record groups:
This catalog was compiled by Cynthia G. Fox and edited by Constance Potter 
 and Katherine V. Coram.
THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATION PROGRAM
Since 1940 the National Archives has been microfilming selected groups of 
 federal records that have high research value. Under this program, negative 
 microfilm is retained by the National Archives and positive prints are made 
 from these master negatives and sold at moderate prices. The chief purposes 
 of the program are to make archival sources more easily accessible to libraries, 
 research centers, and individuals and to ensure against loss of valuable information 
 should the original records be destroyed. In this way, microfilm publications 
 are a partial answer to the researcher's need for more extensive publication 
 of archival materials because they provide a relatively inexpensive method by 
 which he or she can obtain facsimile reproductions of entire series of documents.
Although the microfilm publication program is one of the oldest continuing 
 programs of the National Archives, it was not firmly established financially 
 until 1948, when a grant of $20,000 from the Rockefeller Foundation provided 
 for accelerated production of microfilm and ensured the continuation of the 
 program through the establishment of a revolving fund. By 1995, more than 265,000 
 rolls of master negative microfilm had been produced.
National Archives microfilm publications now provide basic documentation for 
 research in the fields of American, European, Far Eastern, African, and Latin 
 American history as well as in local history and genealogy. They are also valuable 
 for work in other fields, such as economics, public administration, political 
 science, law, and ethnology. As the program has developed, more emphasis has 
 been placed on microfilming groups of records that are directly related to one 
 another, as in the case of records relating to the same general subject or to 
 a specific geographic area. In this way researchers can obtain reasonably complete 
 documentation in many fields of interest. For example, a number of microfilm 
 publications document diplomatic, consular, and naval relations between the 
 United States and the Far Eastern countries of China, Japan, and Korea from 
 the late 18th century. Similarly, almost complete coverage of relations between 
 the United States and other countries throughout the world is provided. Microfilm 
 publications have also been produced concerning the administration of affairs 
 in individual territories of the United States.
Types of Microfilm Publications
National Archives microfilm publications are divided into two series, identified 
 by "M" numbers and "T" numbers. In general, records selected 
 for filming as "M" publications have high research value for a variety 
 of studies, and the ratio of research value to volume is high. Usually each 
 publication reproduces an entire series of records. Most "M" publications 
 include explanatory material prepared by archivists to help researchers glean 
 information from the filmed records more easily. "M" publications 
 usually have an introduction that describes the origin, content, and arrangement 
 of the filmed records and lists related records. Some introductions also include 
 special aids, such as indexes and registers.
Descriptive pamphlets (DPs) are available for many "M" publications. 
 Each pamphlet contains the publication's introduction (including special lists 
 or indexes prepared to simplify the use of the microfilm publication) and a 
 table of contents that identifies the material contained on each roll. "M" 
 publications that have descriptive pamphlets are indicated in this catalog by 
 the symbol "DP" at the end of a publication title. The pamphlets are 
 made available on request to prospective purchasers so they can evaluate more 
 thoroughly the value of the publication's contents for their research.
"T" publications, unlike "M" publications, do not usually 
 reproduce a complete series of records; that is, they may contain only segments, 
 by date or subject, of a larger series. In many cases, "T" publications 
 were produced in response to specific reference requests. Also, over the years 
 the National Archives has accessioned as record material microfilm produced 
 by other federal agencies. Some of this film, when it is not defense classified 
 and is deemed of sufficient research value, is reproduced and made available 
 for sale as "T" publications. These publications are reproduced and 
 sold exactly as they were filmed; they contain no introductions, nor are descriptive 
 pamphlets available for them. All of the Immigration and Naturalization Service 
 (INS) records described in this catalog are "T" publications that 
 were filmed by and accessioned from the INS.
Catalogs of Microfilm Publications
This catalog is one in a series describing National Archives microfilm publications 
 related to subjects of high research interest. Each catalog was compiled through 
 an extensive review of all microfilmed records to locate publications relevant 
 to each topic. The catalogs contain both detailed descriptions of the records 
 and roll-by-roll listings for each publication.
The current catalogs in the series cover the following topics:
In addition, the National Archives has prepared a comprehensive catalog, _Microfilm 
 Resources for Research,_ that lists microfilm publications by record group. 
 These catalogs are currently, or soon will be, available through the National 
 Archives gopher. Printed versions of these catalogs can also be ordered. For 
 information about fees and the ordering of these catalogs, please write to
Publications and Distribution (NECD)
Seventh and Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
or call toll free 866-272-6272. If you live in the Washington, DC, area, 
 please call 202-501-7190.
All microfilm publications of National Archives records are for sale. You can 
 buy either individual rolls or a complete set. The prices as of May 15, 1996, 
 are $34 a roll for domestic orders ($39 a roll for foreign orders) for positive 
 film copies. These prices are subject to change without advance notice. Shipping 
 is included in these prices.
A check or money order made payable to the National Archives Trust Fund must 
 accompany each order. Orders may also be charged to VISA or MasterCard accounts. 
 Government agencies, educational institutions, and businesses may purchase microfilm 
 on an accounts-receivable basis but must submit purchase orders.
National Archives and Records Administration
Archives I Research Support Branch
700 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20408-0001
866-272-6272  (toll-free)
you are not buying a complete set, also state the specific roll number(s) you 
 wish to purchase.
If you need more information on how to order, details of specific shipping 
 charges, or help identifying which rolls of a publication you wish to purchase, 
 please contact Publications and Distribution (NECD), National Archives, Room 
 G9, Seventh and Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20408.
Microfilm Specifications
All microfilm sold through the National Archives microfilm publications program 
 is silver-halide positive microfilm. Rolls are 35mm or 16mm reel microfilm on 
 plastic reels. Reduction ratios range from 12.1 to 20.1; the number of frames 
 on each reel varies.
Chart of Research Rooms
Much of the present-day United States was once a part of the public domain--land 
 owned by the federal government and subject to sale or other transfer of ownership 
 under laws passed by Congress. The records of transactions whereby the government 
 transferred land to individuals either by sale or by grant are called "land-entry 
 papers"; the documents that guarantee title to such land are called "patents."
The United States has used the public domain for several purposes. During the 
 Revolutionary War, the Continental Congress promised bounty land to individuals 
 as an inducement to enter and remain in military service. After the Revolution 
 and following several other conflicts between 1812 and 1855, the federal government 
 issued bounty land warrants to veterans and their heirs as a reward for military 
 service. It also used the promise of free or inexpensive land as a means of 
 encouraging settlement or development of a particular area. Early settlers in 
 a region not yet opened for public sale were often allowed to exercise rights 
 of preemption when the land was later made available. They did so by submitting 
 affidavits and claims showing that they had built a permanent structure or made 
 other required improvements to their preempted tracts as well as proof that 
 they had occupied the tract for a certain period.
Before the Civil War, the government gave land to persons who would make their 
 homes in Florida, Oregon, and Washington State because settlement was a way 
 to confirm a claim to the territory when ownership was disputed by another nation. 
 These grants were known as "donation entries" since individuals received 
 the land free of charge. The government made other land grants to ensure that 
 land would be used for specific purposes, such as timber culture or to help 
 finance the extension of transportation facilities westward.
The earliest claims to land in the United States came in the form of "private 
 claims." These claims asserted a right to ownership of a particular tract 
 based on a grant, purchase, or settlement that took place before the United 
 States acquired sovereignty over the land. Much of the land in what is now the 
 United States was granted or settled between 1685 and 1853, while it was under 
 the rule of France, Great Britain, Mexico, or Spain. Whenever the United States 
 acquired land from a foreign government, it established a board of commissioners 
 or some other agency to adjudicate private land claims. Because these agencies 
 rarely completed their work, the claims were often referred to other agencies, 
 such as the district office of the General Land Office or the United States 
 district courts.
The land records held by the National Archives are found primarily in Record 
 Group 49, the Records of the Bureau of Land Management (which succeeded to the 
 duties of the old General Land Office), or Record Group 21, the Records of District 
 Courts of the United States, because the circuit and district courts were often 
 responsible for the final adjudication of private land claims.
Researchers particularly interested in land records from either of these record 
 groups may wish to visit either the National Archives in Washington, DC, or 
 one of the regional archives listed above since relatively little of this material 
 has been microfilmed. Researchers should also be aware that many state archives 
 or similar agencies have custody of land records that substantially duplicate 
 the information found in the federal records. Records for states that were never 
 part of the public domain--the 13 original states, Maine, Vermont, West Virginia, 
 Kentucky, Tennessee, Texas, and Hawaii--are also maintained by state or local 
 officials rather than by the federal government.
Records of the Bureau of Land Management (Record Group 49)
Military Bounty Land Warrants
Military bounty land warrants were certificates issued to eligible veterans 
 giving them the rights to free land in the public domain. Applications for warrants 
 were processed by a succession of administrative units of the War Department 
 until 1849. In 1841 the Secretary of War placed the responsibility for bounty 
 land matters with the Pension Office, which was transferred in 1840 from the 
 War Department to the newly created Department of the Interior. A warrant was 
 redeemable at any local office of the General Land Office, the agency that was 
 responsible for the disposition of public lands.
Most veterans sold their bounty land warrants. In such cases, the land-entry 
 papers document the land entry by the purchaser rather than by the veteran and 
 his family. For the bounty land applications filed by veterans, see the section 
 on Records of the Veterans Administration below.
U.S. Revolutionary War Bounty Land Warrants Used in the U.S. Military 
 District of Ohio and Related Papers (Acts of 1788, 1803, 1806). M829. 16 rolls. 
 DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces U.S. Revolutionary War bounty land warrants, 
 dated 1789-1833, and related papers dated as late as 1880.
Register of Army Land Warrants Issued Under the Act of 1788, for Service 
 in the Revolutionary War: Military District of Ohio. T1008. 1 roll.
War of 1812 Military Bounty Land Warrants, 1815-1858. M848. 14 rolls. 
 DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces 105 bound volumes containing two series 
 of military bounty land warrants issued between 1815 and 1858 to veterans of 
 the War of 1812 and four volumes of indexes to the warrants.
The donation entry files concern land given away in return for certain conditions 
 of settlement. Under the terms of an act of Congress of 1850, certain white 
 settlers and mixed-blood Indians in the Oregon Territory (which then included 
 Washington) and certain settlers arriving there between December 1, 1850, and 
 December 1, 1853, were entitled to land. The area granted depended upon the 
 marital status of the settler and the date of settlement and varied from 160 
 to 640 acres. Settlers were required to live on the land and cultivate it for 
 4 years.
The first two publications described below, "Abstracts of Donation Land 
 Claims," contain registers that fully identify each claim by name of claimant, 
 land office, and the certificate number. The registers can be used to locate 
 files on the third publication, M815, "Oregon and Washington Donation Land 
 Files."
Documents for the completed land entry in the land files themselves include 
 the notification of settlement, which describes the land either by legal description 
 (range, township, section, and fraction of section) or by natural features (metes 
 and bounds), sometimes accompanied by a plat; an affidavit of settlement, which 
 may include date and place of birth and, if applicable, marriage; proof of cultivation; 
 an oath that the land had been used for cultivation only; for naturalized persons, 
 proof of citizenship (not filmed on M815, however); and the donation certificate, 
 which shows name of entryman, place of residence, description of land, date 
 of patent (document guaranteeing title), and volume and page number of the recorded 
 patent in the National Archives.
Abstracts of Oregon Donation Land Claims, 1852-1903. M145. 6 rolls. 
 DP.
The records reproduced in this publication consist of a 12- volume series in 
 which the General Land Office abstracted the basic facts concerning claims to 
 "donation" land in Oregon, 1852-1903. An alphabetical index to this 
 series, identified as volume 13, has been filmed at the front of roll 1 of this 
 microcopy.
Abstracts of Washington Donation Land Claims, 1855-1902. M203. 1 roll. 
 DP.
The records reproduced in this publication consist of a 3- volume series in 
 which the General Land Office abstracted the basic facts concerning claims to 
 "donation" land in Washington Territory and Washington State, 1855-1902. 
 An alphabetical index to this series, identified as volume 4, has been filmed 
 at the beginning of the roll.
Oregon and Washington Donation Land Files, 1851-1903. M815. 108 rolls. 
 DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces unbound papers executed for Oregon and 
 Washington donation land claims, 1851-1903. The inclusive dates have been derived 
 from the dates of the first notification and the last donation certificate. 
 Occasionally, some of the correspondence relating to donation lands is dated 
 as late as 1967.
The donation claims files are arranged alphabetically by name of state and 
 thereunder by name of land office. For each office there is a main series for 
 approved claims, arranged by final certificate number. There are some variations 
 in the arrangement of records. Sometimes there are separate series for canceled 
 claims, arranged by final certificate or by notification number. There are wide 
 gaps in the sequence of numbers in the canceled donation claims series because 
 many of the numbers were assigned to approved donation claims.
Documents within the files are arranged as nearly as possible in the order 
 in which they were maintained by the clerks in the land offices. A few patented 
 claims filmed at the beginning of the series of patented donation claims maintained 
 by the Oregon City land office are in a slightly different order. The records 
 for a typical donation claim are filmed as follows: the endorsement on the outer 
 page, followed by the final certificate, the notification, and the other documents 
 in chronological order. For the files not having final certificates, the notations 
 on the outer page have been filmed first, followed by the notification and other 
 documents. For canceled or rejected claims, some documents may not be present, 
 especially the final certificate.
List of North Carolina Land Grants in Tennessee, 1778-1791. M68. 1 
 roll. DP.
The volume reproduced on the single roll of this microfilm publication was 
 prepared in the Office of the Secretary of State of North Carolina in 1791 and 
 submitted the same year to Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of State of the United 
 States.
There are five parts to the report, each made up of a list arranged by grant 
 number with six columns giving the following information: number of grants, 
 name of grantee, number of acres, year the grant was made, county in which the 
 land was located, and position of the land, usually indicated by reference to 
 the watercourse on which it was situated. The volume is not indexed.
Lands in North Carolina and Tennessee were never part of the federal public 
 domain; therefore, the General Land Office had no jurisdiction over land transactions 
 in those states.
Private Land Claims Case Files
Private land claims case files concern ownership of a particular tract based 
 on a grant, purchase, or settlement that took place before the United States 
 acquired sovereignty over the land. Types of records include correspondence, 
 reports, maps and plats, petitions, affidavits, transcripts of court decisions, 
 and deeds and abstracts of title. Because proof of title was required, wills, 
 deeds, marriage certificates, and assignments may be found among these records. 
 These records are usually certified copies of original documents. Most of the 
 records were created during the adjudication of claims by agencies of the United 
 States. They do not include the original grant or other documents of the previous 
 government, except perhaps some copies in translation. The records are arranged 
 by docket number with indexes.
Genealogical information in the claims varies. Some claims mention only the 
 name of the claimant and the location of the land. Other claims include such 
 additional information about the claimant as place of residence at the time 
 the claim was made and the names of relatives, both living and dead. Often there 
 is more information about heirs than about the original claimant.
The private land claims case files, particularly those for California, can 
 be difficult to use. Researchers interested in California records often find 
 it helpful to begin with the Spanish Archives at the California State Archives 
 in Sacramento.
Records of District Courts of the United States (Record Group 21)
Court Cases Relating to Private Land Claims
These records document court cases relating to private land claims. They may 
 include information from General Land Office docketed case files as well as 
 records relating to the proceedings of cases in the U.S. district courts.
Index to Private Land Grant Cases, U.S. District Court Northern District 
 of California, 1853-1903. T1214. 1 roll.
Index to Private Land Grant Cases, U.S. District Court, Southern District 
 of California. T1215. 1 roll.
Index by County to Private Land Grant Cases, U.S. District Court, Northern 
 and Southern Districts of California. T1216. 1 roll.
Private Land Grant Case Files in the Circuit Court of the Northern 
 District of California, 1852-1910. T1207. 28 rolls.
Land Claims Case Files and Related Records, U.S. District Court for 
 the Eastern District of Louisiana, 1844-1880. M1115. 16 rolls.
Records of the Veterans Administration (Record Group 15)
Bounty Land Warrant Application Files
A bounty land warrant application file contains the documents relating to 
 claims for bounty land: an application by the veteran or his widow for a warrant, 
 sometimes a discharge certificate submitted by the veteran or his heirs as evidence 
 of service, and a jacket showing whether the claim was approved or disapproved. 
 Selected Records From Revolutionary War Pension and Bounty Land Warrant Application 
 Files, 1800-1900. M805. 898 rolls. DP. This publication reproduces records of 
 interest to genealogists selected from 80,000 pension and bounty land warrant 
 application files based on the participation of American military, naval, and 
 marine officers and enlisted men in the Revolutionary War. Revolutionary War 
 Pension and Bounty Land Warrant Application Files, 1800-1900. M804. 2,670 rolls. 
 DP. This microfilm publication reproduces in their entirety 80,000 pension and 
 bounty land warrant application files based on the participation of American 
 military, naval, and marine officers and enlisted men in the Revolutionary War. 
 These two extensive publications are described in detail in Descriptive Pamphlets 
 M804 and M805, which may be obtained on request from Publications and Distribution 
 (NECD), National Archives, Room G9, Seventh and Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, 
 DC 20408, or by calling 1-866-272-6272. If you live in the Washington, DC, area, 
 please call 202-501-7190.
CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
The National Archives has microfilmed records from many record groups relating 
 to civilian employees of the executive and judicial branches of the federal 
 government. The types and dates of records vary from agency to agency. They 
 include letters of application, recommendation or endorsement, and acceptance; 
 registers of appointments; and letters of resignation.
Most records relating to civilian employees give the full name, position held, 
 agency, place, and dates of employment. Some also show state, territory, or 
 county of birth; age; place from which appointed; and salary. Letters of application 
 and recommendation may include a considerable amount of biographical information 
 about the applicant, such as education, employment history, military service, 
 political activity, and name of a relative. The amount of material in the files 
 varies; it can be voluminous if the position sought was an important one.
Microfilmed letters of application and recommendation and other records of 
 the State Department, appointment files and other records of the Justice Department, 
 appointment records of postmasters, and Interior Department appointment papers 
 are described in this section.
General Records of the Department of State (Record Group 59)
Applications and Recommendations
In the early years of the United States, the State Department was responsible 
 for the conduct of foreign affairs and most aspects of domestic administration 
 not relating to war or finance. Over the years, most of the domestic functions 
 were transferred to other agencies. Because of these varied duties, the Department 
 of State maintained letters of application and recommendation for a variety 
 of federal offices until 1901. Because many of these letters are from or about 
 prominent people, they have a unique biographical value.
The following microfilm publications reproduce letters of application and recommendation 
 for positions in various branches of the federal government. The bulk of the 
 records relate to positions with the State Department or diplomatic or consular 
 officers. The records are arranged in 4- or 8-year blocks by Presidential administration(s) 
 and thereunder alphabetically by the surname of the applicant or person recommended. 
 Descriptive pamphlets that include lists of applicants' names are available. 
 Similar records for the Presidency of George Washington are in the custody of 
 the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress.
State Department Letters of Application and Recommendation During the Administrations 
 of:
John Adams, 1797-1801. M406. 3 rolls. DP.
Thomas Jefferson, 1801-1809. M418. 12 rolls. DP.
James Madison, 1809-1817. M438. 8 rolls. DP.
James Monroe, 1817-1825. M439. 19 rolls. DP.
John Quincy Adams, 1825-1829. M531. 8 rolls. DP.
Andrew Jackson, 1829-1837. M639. 27 rolls. DP.
Martin Van Buren, William Henry Harrison, and John Tyler,
1837-1845. M687. 35 rolls. DP.
James Polk, Zachary Taylor, and Millard Fillmore, 1845-1853.
Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan, 1853-1861. M967. 50 rolls. DP.
Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson, 1861-1869. M650. 53 rolls. DP.
Ulysses S. Grant, 1869-1877. M968. 69 rolls. DP.
Other State Department Records Relating to Appointments
List of United States Consular Officers, 1789-1939. M587. 21 rolls. 
 DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces the State Department's list of U.S. 
 consular officers, 1789-1939. For each consular post, the name of each consular 
 officer is provided, along with his title or grade, nationality, place of birth, 
 residence when appointed, and date of appointment. Occasionally, a date of death, 
 retirement, termination of service, or transfer to another post is given. The 
 lists are arranged alphabetically by post, then by the class of officer, and 
 finally by date of appointment.
List of United States Diplomatic Officers, 1789-1939. M586. 3 rolls. 
 DP.
This microfilm publication reproduces the State Department's list of U.S. 
 diplomatic officers, 1789-1939. For each diplomatic post the name of each officer 
 is provided, along with title or grade, nationality, place of birth, residence 
 when appointed, and date of appointment. Occasionally, a date of death, retirement, 
 termination of service, or transfer to another post is given. The lists are 
 arranged alphabetically by country, then by the class of officer, and finally 
 by date of appointment.
Resignations and Declinations Among the Records of the Department of 
 State, 1789-1827. T730. 1 roll.
This microfilm publication reproduces the first of eight chronological series 
 of letters received in the Department of State declining or resigning from appointments 
 in the federal service. The letters in this series are arranged alphabetically 
 by name of writer.
General Records of the Department of Justice (Record Group 60)
Records Relating to the Appointment of Federal Judges, Attorneys, and 
 Marshals
The following microfilm publications reproduce the Justice Department appointment 
 files for Idaho, Oregon, Utah, and Washington. (Records for other states are 
 not available on microfilm.) The records are arranged by the Presidential administration 
 in which the applicant filed for a position of federal judge, attorney, or marshal. 
 Thereunder they are filed alphabetically by the name of the applicant. The descriptive 
 pamphlets that accompany these publications include lists of applicants names. 
 General records, which include lists of applicants and other documents not readily 
 identifiable with any one individual, are microfilmed at the beginning of the 
 appointment records for each Presidential administration. Before 1853 the Secretary 
 of State handled the correspondence pertaining to appointments of judicial and 
 legal offices of the federal government.
Records Relating to the Appointment of Federal Judges, Attorneys, and 
 Marshals for the Territories and States of Idaho, 1861-1899. M681. 9 rolls. 
 DP.
Oregon, 1853-1903. M224. 3 rolls. DP.
Utah, 1853-1901. M680. 14 rolls. DP.
Washington, 1853-1902. M198. 17 rolls. DP.
Index to Names of U.S. Marshals, 1789-1960. T577. 1 roll. 16mm.
This microfilm publication reproduces an alphabetical list giving dates and 
 places of service.
Records of the Office of the Secretary of the Interior (Record Group 
 48)
The following microfilm publications reproduce appointment papers chiefly 
 for positions under the direct control of the Office of the Secretary of the 
 Interior and filled by Presidential appointment. Included are letters of application 
 and recommendation, petitions, oaths of office, bonds, and reports from the 
 Commissioners of Indian Affairs or the General Land Office. Some of the documents 
 relate to the removal or resignation of appointees.
The papers are arranged by office or position, thereunder alphabetically by 
 name of applicant or incumbent, and thereunder by date the document was received 
 in the Appointments Division. The publications are listed alphabetically by 
 state or territory.
Interior Department Appointment Papers
Arizona Territory, 1857-1907. M576. 22 rolls.
California, 1849-1907. M732. 29 rolls. DP.
Territory of Colorado, 1857-1907. M808. 13 rolls. DP.
Florida, 1849-1907. M1119. 6 rolls.
Idaho, 1862-1907. M693. 17 rolls. DP.
Mississippi, 1849-1907. M849. 4 rolls. DP.
Missouri, 1849-1907. M1058. 9 rolls. DP.
Nevada, 1860-1907. M1033. 3 rolls. DP.
Territory of New Mexico, 1850-1907. M750. 18 rolls. DP.
New York, 1849-1906. M1022. 5 rolls. DP.
North Carolina, 1849-1892. M950. 1 roll. DP.
Territory of Oregon, 1849-1907. M814. 10 rolls. DP.
Wisconsin, 1849-1907. M831. 9 rolls. DP.
Wyoming, l869-1907. M830. 6 rolls. DP.
Records of the Post Office Department (Record Group 28)
Record of Appointment of Postmasters, 1789-1832. M1131. 4 rolls.
This microfilm publication reproduces four volumes that document dates of 
 appointment of postmasters and, after 1814, dates of establishment of post offices. 
 The first volume is a chronological list of first returns of postmasters and 
 can be used primarily to verify service. Volumes 2 through 4 are generally arranged 
 alphabetically by post office on a national rather than a state basis. The records 
 before 1824 do not show the names of the counties in which the post offices 
 were situated. Some of the pages are not entirely legible.
Record of Appointment of Postmasters, 1832-September 30, 1971. M841. 
 145 rolls. DP.
The records in this publication are arranged alphabetically by state (territory, 
 possession, etc.), and thereunder by county (parish, district, etc.). They show 
 the dates of Presidential appointments of postmasters and the dates of their 
 confirmation by the Senate. The records do not contain any other personal information 
 on postmasters. They do not contain the names or other information on postal 
 clerks, mail contractors, or mail carriers.
National Archives Trust Fund Board
National Archives and Records Administration
1983, electronic rev. 1995
This page was last reviewed on October 10, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272