SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/denver/plan-your-research-visit

National Archives at Denver
Visit this online exhibit, featuring holdings from our Regional Archives in Chicago, Illinois.
The National Archives at Denver provides researchers the opportunity to view original records created by federal agencies and courts in Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming. Because each record is a unique and irreplaceable piece of American history, researchers must follow certain rules, requirements, and guidelines in order to ensure the continued preservation of the records.
Each National Archives facility holds different groups of records. To make the most efficient use of your time, please
by mail, email, or telephone in advance to make sure that the records you want to see are available at our location.
When submitting an inquiry, include your contact information so that we can reach out to you in case more information is needed. All requests are answered in the order they are received, regardless of the method you use to communicate with us. Please allow 10 business days for us to respond, although we often are able to respond much sooner than that.
In order to answer your questions properly, please tell us:
This information is only a brief introduction to what you should expect when you are working with original records at the National Archives at Denver.  It is not a complete list of our rules and regulations.  Before you can begin working with records, you will be required to review and agree to our research room rules and copy policies.
Obtaining a Researcher Card
Before using our archival holdings, every researcher must present a valid Researcher Card issued by the National Archives at Denver or another NARA facility. New researchers should plan for a total of 10-15 minutes to complete the registration process. To obtain a Researcher Card, an applicant must:
Your Researcher Card must be present during each research visit.
Renewing or Replacing Your Researcher Card
Before You Enter the Research Room
Inside the Research Room
Tips for Handling Our Holdings
This page was last reviewed on August 20, 2024.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272