SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/conservation/library-materials-09.html

When a flood or fire-damaged collection is covered by insurance, full 

settlement of a claim cannot be realized until the lost and damaged materials 

have been listed and their values established. The extent and success of 

possible restoration must also be determined. In the event that a claim is 

anticipated as a result of such damage, every item should be salvaged, frozen, 

and dried. After drying, the affected materials should be shelved in a specially 

equipped environmental storage area, isolated from the main stacks, and there 

inspected and monitored over a period of time. Such a policy is the best 

guarantee of sound judgments by custodians, consultants, and adjusters when they 

must calculate the degree of loss as a basis for compensation.
SUMMARY OF EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Seek the advice and help of book and paper conservators with experience in 

salvaging water-damaged materials as soon as possible.
Turn off heat and create free circulation of air.
Keep fans and air-conditioning on day and night and use dehumidifiers and 

insure a constant flow of air is necessary to reduce the threat of mold.
Brief each worker carefully before salvage operations begin, giving full 

information on the dangers of proceeding except as directed. Emphasize the 

seriousness of timing and the priorities and aims of the whole operation. 

Instruct workers on means of recognizing manuscripts, materials with 

water-soluble components, leather and vellum bindings, materials printed on 

coated paper stock, and photographic materials.
Do not allow workers to attempt restoration of any items on site. This was a 

common error in the first 10 days after the Florence flood, when rare and 

valuable leather and vellum-bound volumes were subjected to scrubbing and 

processing to remove mud. This resulted in driving mud into the interstices of 

leather, vellum, cloth, and paper, caused extensive damage to the volumes, and 

made the later work of restoration more difficult, time consuming, and extremely 

costly.)
Carry out all cleaning operations, whether outside the building or in 

controlled environment rooms, by washing gently with fresh, cold running water 

and soft cellulose sponges to aid in the release of mud and filth. Use sponges 

in a dabbing motion; do not rub. These instructions do not apply to materials 

with water-soluble components. Such materials should be frozen as quickly as 

possible.
Do not attempt to open a wet book. (Wet paper is very weak and will tear at a 

touch. One tear costs at least one dollar to mend!) Hold a book firmly closed 

when cleaned, especially when washing or sponging. A closed book is highly 

resistant to impregnation and damage.
Do not attempt to remove mud by sponging. Mud is best removed from clothes 

when dry; this is also true of library materials.
Do not remove covers from books, as they will help to support the books 

during drying. When partially dry, books may be hung over nylon lines to finish 

drying. Do not hang books from lines while they are very wet because the weight 

will cause damage to the inside folds of the sections.
Do not press books and documents when they are water soaked. This can force 

mud into the paper and subject the materials to stresses which will damage their 

structures.
Use soft pencils for making notes on slips of paper but do not attempt to 

write on wet paper or other artifacts.
Clean, white blotter paper, white paper towels, strong toilet paper, and 

unprinted newsprint may be used for interleaving in the drying process. When 

nothing better is available, all but the color sections of printed newspapers 

may be used. Care must be taken to avoid rubbing the inked surface of the 

newspaper over the material being dried; otherwise some offsetting of the ink 

may occur.
Under no circumstances should newly dried materials be packed in boxes and 

left without attention for more than a few days.
Do not use bleaches, detergents, water-soluble fungicides, wire staples, 

paper or bulldog clips, adhesive tape, or adhesives of any kind. Never use 

felt-tipped fiber or ballpoint pens or any marking device on wet paper.
Never use colored blotting paper or colored paper of any kind to dry books 

and other documents.
Used and damp interleaving sheets should not be reused.
Frequent changing of interleaving material is much more effective than 

allowing large numbers of sheets to remain in place for extended periods.
Newsprint should not be left in books after drying is complete.
A good grade of paper toweling is more effective than newsprint, but the cost 

is much greater.
This publication was produced as a public service. It may be reproduced and 

distributed freely in part or in its entirety. When duplicating individual 

articles please copy them exactly as they appear so that proper credit will be 

given to the originating institution.
The editors of this publication will be collaborating on additional projects. 

If there are issues which you would like to see addressed in the future please 

send your ideas to:
Preservation Programs
National Archives at College Park
College Park, MD 20740-6001
Disaster Preparedness Table of Contents
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272