SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/foia

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) gives any person the right to request access to records of the executive branch of the U.S. Government. Federal agencies are required to disclose any information requested under the FOIA unless it falls under one of
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) processes Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for two distinct types of records:
. There are a few ways to make FOIA requests for archival and operational records — it starts with selecting the right type of record.
are records created by executive branch agencies and the White House that have been transferred into the legal custody of the National Archives.
Learn how to file your Archival FOIA request
Learn more about requesting highly sensitive historical records subject to FOIA:
Special Access and FOIA Program
are records created by NARA and its employees in the process of carrying out its mission and responsibilities.
Submitting FOIA requests via FOIAonline ended September 30, 2022.
Submit Operational FOIA requests by sending an email to FOIA@nara.gov
Learn more about requesting operational and archival records:
Freedom of Information Act Reference Guide
Electronic Reading Room
Find documents frequently requested under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) as well as information routinely available to the public.
Track Pending FOIA Requests
Office of Government Information Services (OGIS)
is a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) resource for the public and the government.
Congress has charged OGIS with reviewing FOIA policies, procedures and compliance of federal agencies and identifying ways to improve compliance.
Their mission also includes resolving FOIA disputes between federal agencies and requesters.​
This page was last reviewed on December 20, 2022.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272