SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/research/census/census-tract-data.html

Berryman Political Cartoon Collection
View in National Archives Catalog
Census Tract Data Files
National Archives [Description] Identifier:
Records of the Community and Family Study Center (CFS), University of Chicago
Between about 1967 to about 1986, under the direction of Dr. Donald Bogue, the Community and Family Study Center (CFS) at the University of Chicago created, from Bureau of the Census publications, electronic versions of the 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970 Censuses summary population and housing statistics for census tracts in most tracted cities and metro areas. Below is a list of the available cities/metro areas; please note that not all tracted cities/metro areas are available for all years. Elizabeth Mullen Bogue and other staff members keypunched the data from the printed publications and also used data tabulations from the 1960 and 1970 Censuses prepared by DUALabs to create the electronic data files. In 1998, Dr. Donald Bogue donated by deed of gift the Census Tract Data Files to the National Archives. This series includes:
Researchers may obtain copies of data files for entire census years, for individual cities/metro areas for specific years, or for the entire series. Researchers then can analyze the records directly, using whatever hardware and software available to them.
the data files and documentation via the National Archives Catalog. The files available for download are in the ASCII character set with fixed-length, delimited records (option 2 below).  For more details on downloading files, please review the
frequently asked questions (FAQs)
Alternatively, researchers may order copies the data files and documentation for a fee.  For more information see:
Ordering Information for Electronic Records
. The specific technical output options for these Census Tract Data Files include:
Available Tracted Cities/Metro Areas by Year
National Archives at College Park
8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001
Electronic Records Main Page
This page was last reviewed on September 14, 2021.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272