SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/calendar/event/ikes-book-club-virtual-roundtable-2

View the National Archives
The yearlong journey continues!
The Real Ike: Eisenhower Fact and Fiction
by Martin Mack Teasley
tinyurl.com/IkeBookClub
IKE'S BOOK CLUB:﻿ ﻿A Yearlong Journey﻿
Join Ike's Book Club for a yearlong journey into the profound legacy and context of the 34th president. Our program features one book per quarter, each including a community Virtual Roundtable discussion and a special in-person Author Event.
by Dr. Brian C. Black
This book explores Dwight Eisenhower's participation in the 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy, which assessed the nation's roadways for military use and later served as inspiration for the Interstate Highway Act of 1956.
• Virtual Roundtable: Tuesday, 2/24 at 6 p.m.
• Author Event: Tuesday, 3/31 at 6 p.m.
Rising Star, Setting Sun
Detailing the complex transition of power from President Dwight D. Eisenhower to John F. Kennedy, this book examines the shift that symbolized a new generational era in American politics.
• Virtual Roundtable: Tuesday, 5/26 at 6 p.m.
• Author Event: Tuesday, 6/30 at 6 p.m.
Whistle-Stop Politics
Take an entertaining journey through 185 years of American politics, exploring how campaigning by train profoundly shaped elections, journalism, and culture.
• Virtual Roundtable: Tuesday, 8/25 at 6 p.m.
• Author Event: Tuesday, 9/29 at 6 p.m.
The Real Ike: Eisenhower Fact and Fiction
by Martin Mack Teasley
Drawing on experience as a former deputy director of the Eisenhower Presidential Library, the author presents a fresh perspective on "Ike," separating fact from fiction, addressing common myths, and answering frequently asked questions.
• Virtual Roundtable: Tuesday, 10/27 at 6 p.m.
• Author Event: Tuesday, 12/8 at 6 p.m.
All events listed in the calendar are free unless noted.
This page was last reviewed on February 24, 2026.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272