SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/presidential-records/support-to-the-white-house/transitions/interviews

These White House transition interviews discuss the organization of the White House staff in the presidential administrations from Richard M. Nixon through William Jefferson Clinton. They also discuss the transitions between the presidential administrations, and the successes and lessons learned during these periods. This project was funded by The Pew Charitable Trusts and associated with the American Enterprise Institute's initiative entitled Transition to Governing.
The White House Transition Interview transcripts are deeded to the United States Government and are in the public domain. The interviewees represented on this web site have deeded the transcripts of their interviews to the presidential library of their choice.
View additional National Archives
Copyright, Restrictions, and Permissions
Transcript, [Name of Interviewee] Oral History Interview, [Date of Interview], by [Name(s) of Interviewer(s)], Office of Presidential Libraries, National Archives and Records Administration; White House Interview Program, White House Transition Project.  Online: [web address of cited transcript] (accessed [Date of download or review of web page.]
Transcript, Alexander M. Haig, Jr., Oral History Interview, December 22, 1999, by Martha Joynt Kumar, Office of Presidential Libraries, National Archives and Records Administration; White House Interview Program, White House Transition Project.  Online:
http://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries/research/transition-interviews/pdf/haig.pdf
(accessed December 18, 2008).
White House Transition Project
(WHTP) set out to ease the presidential transition process by conducting oral history interviews with former White House staffers from the Richard M. Nixon administration through the William Jefferson Clinton administration. The project worked closely with the
Office of Presidential Libraries
. The interviewees represented on this website have deeded the transcripts of their interviews to the Presidential Library of their choice.
This page was last reviewed on September 28, 2023.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272