SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/research/genealogy/start-research

Resources for Genealogists
The records in our holdings that are most commonly used by genealogists include, Census, Military, Immigration (Ship Passenger Lists), Naturalization, and Land records.
To learn more about these records and how to access them, we recommend that you:
Beginning your Genealogical Research at the National Archives and Records Administration
"  presentation provides an excellent introduction to most popular genealogical records at NARA.
(Save to your computer and then open, or open directly.)
pages, you will learn about records available at NARA, and how to use them.  You will also find links to articles, finding aids, and links to digitized records in the Catalog, when available.  You may want to start with these records:
We have many genealogy presentations available online, where you can learn about additional records available at NARA for genealogy, and how to use them.
page from National Genealogical Society
Palaeography: reading old handwriting 1500-1800: A practical online tutorial
, from The National Archives of the U.K.
Genealogy Learning Center
, free online classes on beginning genealogy, internet genealogy, and tracing immigrant origins.
If your research seems to hit a dead-end or poses a tough problem, you can often find other paths by learning how others solved their research problems. Here are some online resources that may provide some ideas and answers.
Consult books and articles about what records are available, where they can be found, and steps in the genealogical research process. Here are the names of some books you may find in your local library or bookstore. (Please note: these are not endorsed by the National Archives. They are mentioned here as possibly helpful resources.)
The following can be found in libraries with a large genealogical collection, or you may be able to purchase back issues from the societies that published them.
We provide workshops to help people learn how to use historical documents when conducting genealogical research. See our list of
National, regional, and local genealogical societies
also often hold workshops and conferences geared towards beginning genealogists.
You can also listen to recordings of
lectures from previous national and regional genealogy conferences
. These cover the vast array of genealogical research topics, and many are geared to the beginner.
In addition to sponsoring workshops and webinars, other help is also available through genealogical societies. Most publish newsletters and other materials describing genealogical research and services in the area. Many also have libraries and other helpful resources. You may find it helpful to join both your local genealogical society as well as those where your ancestors lived.
To find a genealogical society in North America, you can search by state/province from the
National Genealogical Society
Other web site that may assist you in locating local societies are:
U.S. Genealogy sites state by state
Directory of Genealogy Libraries in the U.S.
This video addresses procedures and security measures at the National Archives in Washington, DC, as well as how to use the research room and records.
This page was last reviewed on March 28, 2023.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272