SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/environmental-control/mold-prevention.html

National Park Service - Conserve O Gram, Number 3/4
"Mold and Mildew: Prevention of Microorganism Growth In Museum Collections"
Formerly issued as Conserve O Gram 3/6. Revised, July 1993.
Mold is the common term used to describe a downy or furry growth on the 

surface or organic matter, caused by fungi, especially in the presence of 

dampness and decay. A fungus (pl. fungi) may be any of a large number of 

microorganisms that are parasites feeding on living organisms or dead organic 

matter.
Mold is often used interchangeably with the word mildew. They are the generic 

terms that describe a variety of microorganisms, including fungi, algae, rusts, 

yeasts, and bacteria, that are agents of deterioration for museum objects. They 

produce irregular stains that can permanently damage an object. Collection 

managers must be able to recognize signs of these problems and be prepared to 

take preventive actions.
Fungi are simple-celled organisms that do not need energy from light for 

growth. The fungi bear microscopic spores that are produced in enormous 

quantities, are always present in the air, and spread via air currents. They are 

often water repellent and are resistant to desiccation (drying out). Extreme 

cold and heat will destroy them.
When the spores are in favorable environment, they will germinate. What 

constitutes a favorable environment is different for each species. After landing 

on a host material, a spore must obtain sufficient moisture to germinate and 

find enough food. Without moisture, the spores will lie dormant until favorable 

conditions occur.
For this reason, it is important to control the environmental conditions 

where museum collections are stored or exhibited. The NPS "Museum Handbook," 

Part I (Rev 9/90), Chapter 4, recommends that temperatures not exceed 24øC 

(75øF) and relative humidity (RH) not rise above 65%. These conditions are 

maximum levels and only reduce the potential for microorganism growth. They do 

not eliminate he threat. Some microorganisms can grow in significantly lower 

temperatures and at lower RH levels. Certain materials need to be stored with 

lower RH levels to prevent growths. Refer to the NPS "Museum Handbook," Part I 

(Rev 9/90), Figure 4.3, chart for the RH target levels for various materials and 

types of objects that are housed in park museum collections.
NOTE: Some species of microorganisms cause health risks in the form of 

chronic lung irritation. Always exercise caution when handling badly infested 

materials, i.e. wear a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter respirator 

and disposable gloves. (See also "Conserve O Gram" 16/1).
Susceptible Materials
Microorganisms need organic materials to supply nutrients and, therefore, 

museum objects composed of organic materials are potentially at risk. 

Cellulose-based materials, such as cotton, linen, paper and wood, and 

proteinaceous materials such as leather and hair loth are particularly 

susceptible to direct attack by microorganisms.
Inhospitable materials, such as plastics, are not immune from fungal growths 

but how they support these growths is not fully understood by biologists. 

Certain mites feed on fungi and can carry spores onto normally resistant 

materials. As the mites die, they become the nutrients for a new fungal colony. 

This ability to exist on almost any material characterizes microorganisms as 

primary agents of deterioration.
Microorganisms will permanently damage the materials supporting them. They 

will stain textiles and decrease the strength of the fabric. The scattered spots 

known as foxing on paper prints or drawings is damage resulting from these 

growths. Leather is particularly susceptible to the actions of microorganisms 

and will be stained and weakened by them. As a by-product, fungi can produce 

organic acids that will corrode and etch inorganic materials.
Often the first indication that a microorganism problem exists is a 

characteristic musty odor. A careful visual examination will generally locate 

stains that are clearly visible as pigmentations on a surface.
Another means of detection is by the use of ultraviolet (UV) light. Under UV 

light, a microorganism growth will appear luminescent.
The best means to prevent or control the spread of microorganism growth is to 

deny the spores the moisture necessary for germination. Therefore, regulating 

the environment, especially the RH, is essential for preventing the 

deterioration of a museum collection from microorganism growth.
RH levels should be routinely monitored. Spore germination is less likely to 

occur if RH is controlled between 45% and 55%, but RH should be kept below 65%. 

When RH levels rise above 65%, the use of portable dehumidifiers will be 

necessary to reduce the moisture content of the air. A temperature between 18øC 

and 20øC (64øF to 68øF) should be targeted. These levels only decrease the 

potential of germination and growth; they do not eliminate it. Therefore, other 

factors, such as adequate aircirculation should be maintained; a fan will help 

to increase circulation.
Problem environmental conditions that may contribute to higher humidity 

levels need to be corrected. Repair leaking pipes, gutters and downspouts, 

cracked windows, a problem roof, deterio- rated brick, masonry pointing, or 

cracked walls.
It is also important to keep any area that houses museum collections clean 

and free of dust and dirt and organic debris that can nourish spores.
Silica gel and other buffers can help adjust RH conditions within a sealed 

space, such as in a storage cabinet or exhibit case. These buffers will absorb 

or release moisture into the surrounding atmosphere. The quantity of buffering 

material to place within the space must be customized for each situation and a 

conservator should be consulted for assistance in determining this need. It 

takes time, experience, and careful monitoring to ensure that the buffers are 

performing as intended. (See NPS "Museum Handbook," Part I (Rev 9/90), Appendix 

I, for additional guidance on the use of silica gel.)
Collections should be inspected regularly for signs of microorganism growth. 

If an object shows signs of infestation, the piece should be sealed in a 

polyethylene bag or enclosed in polyethylene sheeting to prevent the spread of 

spores to other objects. Remove the object to an isolated space where the RH can 

be lowered by running a dehumidifier.
A conservator should be contacted for assistance in dealing with the infested 

material. However, as a general procedure, vacuuming is appropriate in most 

situations. The object should be removed from the polyethylene and the bag or 

sheeting discarded. The object should then be vacuumed using a vacuum cleaner 

which will not exhaust the spores back out into the room. A vacuum fitted with a 

HEPA filter is recommended; however, the water bath filter vacuum cleaner, such 

as the Rainbow brand vacuum, that many parks have been using, is acceptable for 

this purpose. Follow all precautions when vacuuming an object: use the lowest 

effective suction and protective screening. (See NPS "Museum Handbook," Part I 

(Rev 9/90), Appendix K, for vacuuming procedures.) Wear disposable gloves when 

handling a contaminated object. Seal the vacuum cleaner bag, gloves and other 

contami- nated materials in a plastic bag and dispose of them in the trash 

outside the building. Also dispose of storage materials, i.e., acid free box or 

tissue, that were used to store the object. Chemical eradication of a 

microorganism infestation with a biocide capable of killing the growths may only 

be considered in consultation with the Regional Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 

Coordinator and the Regional Curator. A proposal for chemical use must be 

submitted and receive final approval from the Service-wide IPM Coordinator in 

Washington, DC. (See NPS "Museum Handbook," Part I (Rev 9/90), Chapter 5, for 

guidance.) Use must conform to all NPS and Environmental Protection Agency 

restrictions and guidelines. In addition, a conservator with a specialization in 

the specific materials to be treated would be consulted to review the potential 

effects of any chemical on the object.
UV lamps are available through hardware stores.
Silica gel is available from conservation and archival-quality materials 

suppliers.
HEPA filter respirators and disposable gloves are available from laboratory 

supply companies, such as Lab Safety Supply, P.O. Box 1368, Janesville, WI 

54547-1368, (800)356-0783.
HEPA filter vacuum cleaners are available from laboratory supply companies, 

such as Lab Safety Supply, and from Nilfisk of America, 300 Technology Drive, 

Malvern, PA 19355, (213)647-4620.
SERIES NOTE: The "Conserve O Gram" series is published as a reference on 

collections management and curatorial issues. Mention of a product, a 

manufacturer, or a supplier by name in this publication does not constitute an 

endorsement of that product or supplier by the National Park Service. Sources 

named are not all inclusive. It is suggested that readers also seek alternative 

product and vendor information in order to assess the full range of available 

supplies and equipment.
The series is distributed to all NPS units and is available to non-NPS 

institutions and interested individuals by subscription through the 

Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 

20402. For further information and guidance concerning any of the topics or 

procedures addressed in the series, contact the National Park Service, 

Curatorial Services Division, Harpers Ferry, WV 25425, (304)535-6410.
This publication was produced as a public service. It may be reproduced and 

distributed freely in part or in its entirety. When duplicating individual 

articles please copy them exactly as they appear so that proper credit will be 

given to the originating institution.
The editors of this publication will be collaborating on additional projects. 

If there are issues which you would like to see addressed in the future please 

send your ideas to:
Preservation Programs
National Archives at College Park
College Park, MD 20740-6001
Disaster Preparedness Table of 

Contents
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272