SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/publications/ebooks

Books and exhibit guides available for your PC, Mac, and mobile device.
America and the World is an eBook designed to teach students about United States history through the analysis of political cartoons.
This workbook includes primary sources to help students explore some of the core concepts, or protections, found in the Bill of Rights, and how they’ve been tested throughout American history.
This is the exhibition catalog for the National Archives exhibit "Amending America." Discover the remarkably American story of how we amended, or attempted to amend, our Constitution in order to form a more perfect union.
Representing Congress is an eBook which presents a selection of political cartoons and learning resources to engage students in a discussion of what Congress is, how it works, and what it does.
The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 was the first significant law restricting immigration into the United States. Documents and records of individual case files and Certificates of Residence housed in the National Archives detail the individual stories resulting from this and subsequent legislation. Explore these primary source materials through the National Archives' book and iTunes U course.
This is the exhibition catalog for "Spirited Republic", the National Archives exhibit exploring the role the Federal government has played in regulating, promoting, investigating, prohibiting, and warning about alcohol. The exhibit will be on view at the National Archives in Washington, DC March 6, 2015 through January 10, 2016.*
This eBook is an adaptation of the exhibition catalog for The National Archives Museum's popular “What's Cooking, Uncle Sam?” exhibit. The records featured in “What's Cooking” were all produced in the course of Government efforts to ensure that Americans enjoy an ample, safe, and nutritious diet.
This eBook focuses on James Madison's leadership role in creating the Bill of Rights, effectively completing the U.S. Constitution.
This exhibit guide is an invitation to discover some of the stories behind the millions of signatures that are preserved in the National Archives.
This ebook tells the story of our national pastime through documents, photographs, audio, video, and other records preserved at the National Archives.
This ebook is a compilation of articles written by our Education staff over the last three decades. It was created in celebration of the 225th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution in Philadelphia in 1787.
This ebook presents the Emancipation Proclamation in its social and political context with documents from the National Archives' holdings.
This page was last reviewed on June 25, 2018.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272