SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/seattle/plan-your-visit

National Archives at Seattle
order copies of many genealogical records online
Using Original Records
Using the Public Access Research Room
The National Archives at Seattle provides researchers the opportunity to view original records created by Federal agencies in Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington.  Because each record is a unique and irreplaceable piece of American history, researchers must follow certain rules, requirements, and guidelines in order to ensure the continued preservation of the records.
Research can be initiated by email, mail, or telephone. Please do not submit your request in multiple formats.
Our research rooms are open by appointment only. Each National Archives facility holds different groups of records. To make the most efficient use of your time, please email, write, or telephone us for a virtual consultation to make sure that the documents or the microfilm you want to see are available at our location.
We want to make sure that you have the best results possible. For that reason, it’s important to make sure that the records you’re interested in are available at our facility. We may also be able to help you identify a more specific range of records to examine or suggest additional records.
To view original records in our research room, please email
seattle.archives@nara.gov
or call us (206) 336-5132 in advance to schedule a visit and a virtual consultation.
When submitting an inquiry, include your contact information so we can reach out to you in case more information is needed. All requests are answered in the order they are received, regardless of the method you use to communicate with us. Please allow 10 business days for us to respond.
In order to answer your questions properly, please tell us:
This information is only a brief introduction to what you should expect when you are working with original records at the National Archives at Seattle.  It is not a complete list of our rules and regulations.  Before you can begin working with records, you will be required to complete the Online Researcher Certification.
Before using our archival holdings, every researcher must present a valid Researcher Card issued by the National Archives at Seattle or another NARA facility. New researchers should plan for a total of 15-20 minutes to complete the registration process. To obtain a Researcher Card, an applicant must:
If you forget or lose your Researcher Card, talk to the staff when you arrive on your next planned research visit.  If your card was issued at Seattle, we may be able to issue you a replacement.
Our public access computers are available by appointment. Please contact seattle.archives@nara.gov to schedule an appointment.
Phone: (206) 336-5132
seattle.archives@nara.gov
This page was last reviewed on March 19, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272