SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/preservation/family-archives/storing

Different storage conditions changed how these two photographs aged.
Box with folders that fit exactly inside.
What not to do: papers are bent and folded to fit inside the box.
Document box with spacer boards
Image of what not to do, items are hanging outside the folder resulting in creased and crumpled edges
Large flexible sheets can be stored rolled.
How to roll onto a tube:
Line up the originals on the tube. Make sure the tube is larger than the originals with extra room in case it doesn’t roll straight.
Slowly roll the tube so that the originals roll around it. Keep the tube at right angles to the long edges of the originals as you roll. This helps the originals roll straight onto the tube.
Once the originals have been wrapped around the tube, wrap the rolled originals with acid free tissue or bond paper. This will protect them from light damage.
Cover the paper wrapper with polyester film. The polyester film will protect the original and the paper wrapper from water. Polyester film is being rolled on the tube to protect the originals from water.
Loosely tie with cotton twill tape or flat ribbon to secure the polyester film. Cotton twill tape or flat ribbon being loosely tied around the roll to .secure the polyester film
A document in polyester sleeve
Image of what not to do, a book with a polyester sleeve on the page
If your originals are brittle, torn, or heavily used, place each sheet in a polyester L-sleeve. These sleeves reduce the risk of tears and other damage due to handling.
There are a variety of binding styles and types that are safe, including spiral, ring binders, post or clamp bindings, or traditional sewn bindings The album cover material can be cloth, stable plastic, or leather. Choose the look and the style of the album you like. More important than the cover material is the quality of the album pages and other materials in direct contact with the photographs and papers.
Avoid overstuffing albums; don’t add too many items to the pages or too many pages to the album. This can cause damage to the pages of the album and the attached items, as well as make it difficult to use.
An overstuffed photo album page
A stable plastic photo page
A plastic photo corner
The safest method to mount photographs and papers is without glue or adhesive. This can be done by:
Materials that can cause physical damage, will discolor over time, ooze from the edges, or will be difficult to remove in the future including:
Front of the photograph with stains from poor quality glue on the back
Synthetic glue (white glue), hot glue gun adhesives or any other unknown glues Back of the photograph showing poor quality glue
Discolored rubber cement
Degraded pressure sensitive tape
“Magnetic albums” that have self stick adhesive with a clear cover
Non-stainless steel staples and paper clips
Discolored rubber band stuck to a photograph
Unknown plastics or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastics Unstable plastic slide sheet that has become wavy and discolored
This page was last reviewed on September 18, 2025.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272