SOURCE: https://www.archives.gov/publications/genealogy

"[An] important volume. . .[Newman] has produced a work that fills a gap 
      in the bibliographic resources available for research on black Americans."
--The American Archivist
"An exceptionally fine guide, easy to read and understand. It is a most 
      significant contribution to the National Archives subject guide literature."
This award-winning research guide provides accurate, concise information 
      about civilian records in the National Archives textual, photographic, and 
      audiovisual collections that can be used to study the history of African 
      Americans. Records of more than 140 nonmilitary agencies including those 
      of the Office of Education, Federal Housing Administration, Women's Bureau, 
      Commission on Civil Rights, National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, 
      and the Department of Justice are described. Information is provided about 
      each agency, explaining why the agency was involved with African Americans, 
      as well as the volume and characteristics of the records.
6" x 9", 379 pages, 40 illustrations
National Archives and Records Administration, 1984
#100030 Hardcover $25
#200030 Softcover $15
"Exhaustive, well written, well organized, [and] well indexed."
--Civil 
      War Book Exchange & Collectors Newspaper
This guide provides an opportunity to study the vast collection of US 
      Government documents in the National Archives that relate to the Civil War. 
      In addition to the records of the period 1861-65 and the conduct of the 
      war, the book describes records that were generated after Lee's surrender. 
      Although it consists of Federal records, this postwar documentation resolves 
      many questions about the Confederacy, which after its defeat had no opportunity 
      to prepare final government reports, settle administrative and other issues, 
      or institute postwar inquiries. Lengthy administrative histories of the 
      relevant agencies of the Federal Government add to the usefulness of the 
      volume.
"An outstanding reference aid....Those who simply desire a handy, reliable 
      authority on the myriad operations of the Confederate government will also 
      want this book, even if they never crank the handle on a microfilm reader 
      or crack the cover of a dusty ledger."
--Civil War Book Exchange & Collectors Newspaper
This companion volume to the
is a guide to the official 
      archives of the government of the Confederate States of America. The bulk 
      of the book describes materials held by the National Archives, but Confederate 
      records maintained at the Library of Congress and at 29 other institutions 
      have also been covered, as well as information obtained from repository 
      guides and registers, from the
National Union Catalog of Manuscript Collections
, 
      and from bibliographies regarding the holdings of other repositories.
National Archives and Records Administration, 1986
#200121 Softcover $25
--Winner of the 1997 C.F.W. Coker Prize for Innovative Archival Description 
    awarded by the Society of American Archivists
--Selected a 1997 Outstanding Academic Book by Choice
"This set of volumes is a must for all research libraries, and for those who 
    research seriously in the Federal Period."
--Robert Charles Anderson,
The American Genealogist
This essential new reference work introduces users to the archival records 
    of the Federal Government. In this three-volume set, two volumes describe 
    the nearly 1.7 million cubic feet of records transferred to the custody of 
    the National Archives as of October 1, 1994, and the third volume indexes 
    these descriptions.
All types of Federal records textual, electronic, cartographic and architectural, 
    and audiovisual are covered. The information is organized into more than 400 
    sections, each of which covers the records found in a single record group, 
    generally one Government agency. Each section opens with an administrative 
    history of the agency and an overview of the extent and location of its archival 
    records, whether those records are in the Washington, DC, area or in a regional 
    Federal archival repository. The overview is followed by specific details 
    of types of records, dates of coverage, and activities documented. The extensive 
    index enables users to trace connections between related records described 
    in separate record groups.
is an invaluable source of information about the rich resources 
    of the National Archives of the United States and an essential addition to 
    the collections of libraries, archival and historical institutions and organizations, 
    Federal agencies, colleges and universities, and professional and private 
    individual researchers.
8 3/4" x 11 3/8", 3 volumes, 2,428 pages
National Archives and Records Administration, 1996
#100009 Hardcover $95
The National Archives contains a wealth of information about individuals 
    whose names appear in census records, military service and pension files, 
    ship passenger arrival lists, land records, and many other types of documents 
    of interest to both beginning and experienced genealogists. The award-winning
shows how to tap this rich resource, explaining what types of 
    records are preserved in the National Archives and what specific information 
    about individuals is included in each type of record.
supersedes the 1985 edition. A complete revision and 
    enlargement, it covers records not described in the earlier version and includes 
    references to information available through the NARA web site. The volume 
    also contains illustrations and photographs, citations to many new and previously 
    cited microfilm publications, and expanded and clarified descriptions of the 
    relevant records held by NARA.
Highlights of the new edition include:
is an indispensable aid for researching family genealogy, 
    local history, and social trends. Beyond its extraordinary reference value, 
    the
will fascinate all curious readers and inspire a deep appreciation 
    of America's rich documentary heritage.
--Winner of the 1982 Waldo G. Leland Prize
awarded by the Society 
      of American Archivists
"A significant publication that will serve as an indispensable research 
      tool."
--The American Archivist
"[A] unique and extraordinarily useful research tool [that] will benefit 
      scholars for years to come."
"A magnificent work that should be on every serious researcher's shelf."
--New Mexico Historical Review
This guide provides descriptions of records that are available in the 
      National Archives and its regional records services facilities. It includes 
      concise information about records that trace the evolution of Federal Indian 
      policy, the effects of national policies on traditional Native American 
      culture, Indian wars and their results, and the role of Native Americans 
      in the development of US society.
6" x 9", 467 pages, 24 illustrations
National Archives and Records Administration, 1984
#200003 Softcover $25
Compiled by Robert M. Kvasnicka
"Ease of use and completeness of information are two important criteria 
    by which to evaluate a collection guide. This Guide succeeds on both counts. 
    . . .Thank you, Robert Kvasnicka, for making the National Archives research 
    experience more rewarding and fun."
This initial volume identifies and describes the Territorial Papers maintained 
    by the Department of State, records relating to Presidential appointments 
    and pardons, and correspondence with departmental officials at various posts 
    in Mexico, Canada, and the Republic of Texas.
also covers records of commissions responsible for establishing 
    the international boundaries of the United States and the settlement of claims 
    involving the Republic of Texas, Great Britain, and Mexico, as well as records 
    concerning Government exhibits at various international expositions held in 
    the Western United States.
This second volume covers correspondence of the Attorney General's Office; 
    records relating to appointments of Federal judges, attorneys, and marshals; 
    and dockets and case files documenting the activities of U.S. attorneys and 
    marshals.
also covers case files for Indian depredation claims as 
    well as other claims brought against the United States, reports and other 
    records of the Bureau of Prisons, Presidential pardon case files and Utah 
    amnesty case files, and investigative case records compiled by predecessors 
    of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016.
Contact us with questions or comments
Freedom of Information Act
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272